From left, President of South Africa Cyril Ramaphosa, Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi, Chinese President Xi Jinping, Russian President Vladimir Putin and Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro attend the BRICS dome session in Brasilia, 14 November 2019. (Photo: EPA-EFE / Joedson Alves) The BRICS Research Group, a Canada and Russia-based NGO, issued its latest compliance report to coincide with this year’s BRICS summit which has been taking place in Brasilia this week. The BRICS Research Group has been monitoring the compliance of the members of the group with their summit commitments for several years. Overall, it gave the give members a “solid” 85% average score for their compliance over the past 15 months with 10 key commitments — out of the total of 73 — they made at the Johannesburg summit in July 2018. It said this showed an improvement on the 79% compliance with the commitments made at the 2017 BRICS summit in Xiamen, China. “Full compliance was achieved on four issues, relating to health, taxation, energy and the macroeconomic issue of global value chains (up from three in the interim report). The commitments on jobs and financial market integration achieved 90% compliance, and crime and corruption had compliance of 80%. The commitment on regional security achieved the lowest score of 40% (up from 20% in the interim report).” China achieved the highest compliance score of 95%, followed by India with 90%, Russia with 85%, South Africa with 80% and Brazil with 75%. The report said at the Johannesburg summit, the BRICS leaders had focused on the theme of BRICS in Africa. The theme of the summit was “BRICS in Africa: Collaboration for Inclusive Growth and Shared Prosperity in the Fourth Industrial Revolution”. The BRICS leaders focused on reinforcing the current multilateral framework and voiced their support for multilateralism in a number of commitments. The declaration also focused on BRICS co-operation in peace and security, particularly in regional security issues related to Syria, Afghanistan and North Korea. “In the economic sphere, BRICS leaders made several commitments for economic co-operation, with a focus on ICT, skills development, open trade and the digital economy. In terms of development, BRICS leaders focused on infrastructure development in Africa, in particular with respect to addressing the infrastructure financing deficit. In addition, the leaders agreed to co-operate in areas such as quota review for the International Monetary Fund, international currency, anti-corruption and international taxation.” The 10 key commitments which the BRICS Research Group selected for assessing the compliance of the BRICS governments were: The BRICS Research Group said the five BRICS nations achieved 100% compliance with their commitments on health (vaccines research), international taxation (BEPS implementation), energy (diversification of supply sources) and macroeconomic policy (global value chains). They achieved 90% compliance with their commitments on jobs (Fourth Industrial Revolution) and financial regulation (market integration); 80% for their commitments on trade (developing multilateral trading system) and crime and corruption (extradition and asset recovery); 70% for their commitments on development (infrastructure in Africa); and only 40% for their commitments on regional security (Syria). The BRICS Research Group is a joint project between the Centre for International Institutions Research (CIIR) of the Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration in Moscow and the Global Governance Programme at Trinity College at the University of Toronto. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.