JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA ñ JANUARY 16: Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi. (Photo by Gallo Images / Sowetan / Sandile Ndlovu) Lesufi revealed this at Forest High School in Johannesburg at the memorial service for the slain 16-year-old Daniel Bakwela on Tuesday. The MEC revealed that it had come to the department’s attention that 13 learners in Gauteng are facing various criminal charges. “I’m ashamed, my dear children, that as I’m speaking to you now, we’ve got about 13 children across the province that are appearing in court for various crimes that they’ve committed outside the school premises. It’s embarrassing,” Lesufi said. The Gauteng education department became aware of this after it was revealed that Bakwela was facing an earlier charge of armed robbery. It was one of the reasons why the state did not oppose bail for Bakwela’s alleged murderer, Mohammed Mwela, News24 reported. “We instructed departmental officials to go to all courts to establish the number of learners that are charged in court and the number of pupils that are about to appear in court,” Lesufi said. When approached by News24 on Wednesday, department spokesperson Steve Mabona could not confirm the specific charges the 13 pupils face. ‘An eye for an eye makes us blind’ On Tuesday, Lesufi told pupils at the school that revenge was never the answer. “There is no child that is born ill-disciplined. Why are we such an ill-disciplined nation? A nation that believes it can resolve problems through violence. An eye for an eye makes all of us blind.” Lesufi said it was better to have a battle of ideas than a battle of weapons. “We have identified almost eight schools that are in the same situation that we are going to enter and enforce the law. And the law is very clear – no tavern, no shebeen, next to a school or next to a church,” he said. The Johannesburg Magistrate’s Court granted Mwela R5 000 bail on Monday. He faces a charge of murder for allegedly stabbing Bakwela to death outside his school. He also faces two charges of attempted murder for allegedly stabbing and wounding two other pupils. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.