Here are the latest developments: * The U.S. military releases a video saying it shows Iran’s Revolutionary Guard drawing up to side of the Japanese-owned Kokuka Courageous tanker and removing an unexploded mine from its hull  1 * The Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman says accusing Iran is “convenient” for U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and other U.S. officials, adding Iran is responsible for security in the Strait of Hormuz  1 * The European Union and China issue calls for restraint from all sides * Iran says it has dispatched experts to assess whether rescued crew – Iranian TV showed 23 crew believed to be from the Front Altair – could return to the vessel * The U.S. Navy says 21 crew from the Kokuka Courageous were rescued by a Dutch tug and transferred to the destroyer USS Bainbridge * Norway’s Frontline, owner of the Front Altair, says a fire aboard the ship, which was carrying naphtha, has been extinguished * Owner Kokuka Sangyo Co says two “flying objects” damaged the Kokuka Courageous but there was no damage to its cargo of methanol * Dutch marine engineer Boskalis says it has been appointed to salvage both tankers * Oil prices, which spiked after the attacks fell on Friday overshadowed by fears about trade disputes (Editing by Edmund Blair) Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.