The opposition had complained to the corruption watchdog in November regarding a 500,000 rand ($33,625) donation by Gavin Watson, CEO of services company Bosasa, to Ramaphosa’s campaign to lead the African National Congress (ANC). Any confirmation of the allegations would be a blow to Ramaphosa, who has pledged to tackle deep-rooted corruption and make state-owned enterprises more efficient in order to attract investment and boost the economy. Mmusi Maimane, who leads the opposition Democratic Alliance, said the Public Protector’s report should be released in full within 48 hours. “The immediate release of this report will leave no room for further leaks and speculation and allow the public and Parliament to hold President Ramaphosa to account for his actions,” Maimane said in a statement. A spokeswoman for the presidency declined to comment. The Sunday Independent newspaper reported that a leaked version of the preliminary report said Ramaphosa had violated the constitution and the executive code of ethics by telling parliament he did not know his son was involved in the donation. Reuters could not verify the newspaper’s report. The corruption watchdog said in a statement on Sunday that the Public Protector and her office would not comment on the contents of any news report or leaked documents that could potentially jeopardize her investigations. In February, Bosasa’s former chief operating officer Angelo Agrizzi told a South African judicial inquiry into alleged influence-peddling that he had bribed politicians and bureaucrats to secure contracts. He and four other former employees of the privately owned company were later arrested on suspicion of corruption and fraud. Also known as African Global Operations, Bosasa is among companies to suffer penalties since Ramaphosa became South African president a year ago, promising to root out corruption. The firm, which applied for voluntary liquidation in February, has declined to comment on the case. ($1 = 14.8700 rand) (Reporting by Tanisha Heiberg; Editing by Catherine Evans) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.