Burnt out trains at the Paarden Eilend Depot in Cape Town, 27 July 2018, Ashraf Hendricks/GroundUp In the wake of the resignation of Nkululeko Poya as chief executive of the Railway Safety Regulator on 6 June, board chair Dr Zethu Qunta said that “after careful consideration of the detrimental impact Mr Poya’s actions had on the Regulator’s reputation and financial position, the Board of the RSR views his resignation as an admission of guilt and in the best interest of the organisation”. The Railway Safety Regulator is the Department of Transport entity tasked with the issuing of rail safety permits, overseeing safety standards and investigating rail accidents. It monitors the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) to ensure the rail network is safe and has the power to suspend Prasa’s safety permit if it does not comply with safety standards – which it had threatened to do in late 2018. Poya was appointed CEO in October 2011. He was placed on suspension in November 2017 following claims that he had been conducting unauthorised investigations into the RSR board as well as Mail and Guardian journalist Athandiwe Saba. Other claims against him include dereliction of duty, not adhering to the authority of the RSR board and dishonesty. In 2018, he applied to the Labour Court to have his disciplinary hearing declared invalid and to interdict the RSR from proceeding with disciplinary hearings against him. His court application was dismissed by Judge Connie Prinsloo. Poya resigned before his disciplinary hearing could continue. Tshepo Kgare is the current acting CEO of the RSR. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.