Photo: Brian Turner via Flickr (CC BY 2.0) Magistrate Basimane  Molwana ordered that Mohamed Mwela must not interact with witnesses and must not enter Forest High until the trial is finalised. Mwela’s bail conditions include that he does not leave the country and if in possession of a passport, he hands it in to the investigating officer working on the case. Molwana also ruled that Mwela be sent to a location for his safety.  He also ordered the Gauteng Education to make alternative arrangements to allow him to complete his exams and that the department considers moving Mwela to a different school.  1 News24 reported that the case was postponed last Thursday after Molwana said he had to go through a fact-finding process in the Johannesburg Magistrate’s Court after the State and defence’s affidavits contained errors and lacked clarity. Mwela is facing a murder and two attempted murder charges after he allegedly stabbed Daniel Bakwela, 16, to death and injured two others outside the Turffontein school in Johannesburg. Among the inconsistencies was the date in Mwela’s affidavit, in which he stated that the incident had happened on May 3 instead of June 3. This saw him being called to the witness stand to confirm under oath that the incident had happened on June 3. Mwela’s attorney, Mudi Mavhengani, submitted Mwela was acting in self-defence as he was being attacked by the deceased’s gang, which, according to the teenager, is known as the “Stouter Kinders”. According to Tuks FM and EWN, parents did not want Mwela back on the premises, even if he was granted bail. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.