The decision by the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal that eThekwini Metro Mayor Zandile Gumede (centre) be placed on leave for 30 days was taken to maintain the integrity of the ruling party. Photo: Aisha Abdool Karim. “We have to ensure that at all material times, those who represent our people enjoy the confidence and support of our people. They must also display impeccable integrity, beyond reproach. When they are [criminally] charged, that has a direct impact on this,” KwaZulu-Natal ANC secretary general Mdumiseni Ntuli told News24 on Monday. During the party’s provincial lekgotla in Empangeni over the weekend, it was revealed that Gumede was stepping aside for the one-month period. She was asked to vacate office by the provincial executive, who also resolved to disband the regional executive committee and replace it with a task team. Gumede is out on R50 000 bail after being arrested for corruption relating to an R230m waste removal tender. ‘Deeper understanding’ Ntuli said the party had to ensure public confidence in the ANC, but also give Gumede the benefit of the doubt. “Those that are charged are not always found guilty. In balancing the two – [public confidence and innocent before proven guilty] – we decided she would have to vacate the office and take leave of absence for 30 days.” He said that, during the one-month period, the party and its structures would be able to gain a “deeper understanding” of Gumede’s case. “We will be able to ascertain how the charging of a comrade will impact their ability to conduct their duties. We must remember that we are not in the office because we have a right to be there, but because you were voted for by the people. We have to listen to people. This is the kind of reflection we will be doing [in the 30 days].” Deputy Mayor Fawzia Peer would probably take over in the meantime, Ntuli said. “There will have to be someone in that position, preferably the deputy, who will be the acting mayor during this period. Once the 30 days is finalised, we will review what to do next.” Ntuli said that public representatives had to uphold standards based on the Constitution. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.