The slugfest began in earnest on Tuesday after Boeing got in on the action with an order for 20 787s from Korean Air Lines, and Airbus promptly fired back with a deal from Saudi Arabia. The trade show regained its familiar head-to-head feel after Boeing Chief Executive Officer Dennis Muilenburg sounded a note of “humility’’ on Monday. The U.S. manufacturer is struggling to get its 737 Max back in the air after two deadly crashes and a grounding that’s now in its fourth month. Here are the latest developments: Boeing broke its drought with a 787 order from Korean Air Lines
Airbus fired back with a Saudia deal for as many as 65 additional A320neos
(All times Paris) Boeing, Air Lease Strike Deal (1:27 p.m.)
Air Lease Corp. reached a deal with Boeing to purchase five 787-9 Dreamliners, valued at $1.5 billion at list prices. Saudia Boosts Order (1:02 p.m.)
Saudi Arabian Airlines increased its commitment for A320neo jets from Airbus to as many as 100 aircraft, from up to 35 previously. The deal, including 15 of the newly launched long-distance A321XLR, would total about $7.5 billion at list prices. Next up will be a decision over larger planes: “In addition to the narrow-body order, evaluations are currently under way for wide-body requirements, expected to be concluded within the next few months,” said Saleh Al-Jasser, the airline’s director general, in a statement. Boeing Breaks Drought (11:42)
Boeing won a 30-plane 787 order from Korean Air Lines. The carrier agreed to buy 10 new 787-10s and 10 additional 787-9s valued at $6.3 billion at current list prices. Korean Air will also lease 10 787-10s from Air Lease Corp. The talks were earlier reported by Bloomberg. Electric Plane
Israel’s Eviation Aircraft made a splash at the show with the unveiling of the all-electric Alice — billed as the world’s first full-sized zero-emission aircraft. The Alice will have its first flight later this year, followed by manufacturing in the U.S. and service entry in 2022. The nine-seat commuter plane has a range of 650 nautical miles and is designed for routes such as Paris to Toulouse and San Jose to San Diego, aiming to reduce costs by as much as 70%. U.S. carrier Cape Air was revealed as the first customer, with a planned fleet of 92 planes. Day One Of The 53rd International Paris Air Show
An Eviation electric aircraft on June 17. Photographer: Jason Alden/Bloomberg
Norwegian XLRs
Norwegian Air Shuttle ASA is in talks with Airbus to buy the latest A321XLR jetliner as it seeks the extra range to serve smaller cities in the U.S. Midwest. The new narrow-body was formally launched at the start of this week’s Paris Air Show. The discount carrier originally ordered 30 A321LRs, and the total may be reduced with the switch, Bjorn Kjos, its chief executive officer, told Bloomberg Television at the expo. Airbus Longer-Range Jet Eyed by Norwegian to Serve U.S. Midwest (Video)
Philippines Order
The country’s largest carrier, Cebu Air Inc., confirmed it has ordered 31 aircraft from Airbus including 10 long-range jets. The deal for 16 A330neo wide-bodies — beating out Boeing — and 15 A320neo-family aircraft includes 10 of the European planemaker’s new A321XLR model. The jets, scheduled for delivery from 2021 to 2026, would be worth $6.8 billion based on the list price. Day Two Of The 53rd International Paris Air Show
Philippe Petitcolin on June 18. Photographer: Jasper Juinen/Bloomberg Prospects for Takeoff
France’s Safran SA, which supplies engines for the Boeing 737 Max through its CFM International venture with General Electric Co., said it expects to see the grounded jet flying again this summer. But CEO Philippe Petitcolin warned that a delay beyond August would force a further slowdown in production beyond the cut of 10 planes a month — to 42 — that’s already been forced on the company. “There’d be another reduction, I don’t think we’d have any other choice,” he said. 737 Max to Fly Again This Summer, Says Safran CEO (Video)
American Air Mulls Up to 50 of XLR Jets
American Airlines Group Inc. is considering an order for as many as 50 of Airbus SE’s new long-range A321XLR jets, a person familiar with the discussions said. The world’s largest carrier sees the plane, which would have the longest range of Airbus’s single-aisle offerings, as a potential replacement for its aging fleet of 34 Boeing Co. 757-200 jets, Bloomberg reported earlier this month. There’s no guarantee a deal will be reached. American Air Mulls Ordering Up to 50 of Airbus’s New A321XLR Jet
Mitsubishi Edges Toward Bombardier
A takeover by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. of Bombardier Inc.’s CRJ regional jet program has merit, according to an executive at the Japanese company’s aviation unit. “It would make a lot of sense in the context of developing and delivering global aircraft,” Steve Haro, a vice president at Mitsubishi Aircraft Corp. The comment raised the possibility that a deal could be reached soon. Mitsubishi Says Buying Bombardier Jet Division Would Make Sense
Qatar Air Nears New Investment
Qatar Airways QCSC will announce a stake in a sixth overseas carrier in the coming months, Chief Executive Officer Akbar Al Baker said, as the Persian Gulf operator turns to outside investments to boost revenue and cash amid a Saudi-led embargo restricting its flights. Day One Of The 53rd International Paris Air Show
Akbar Al Baker boards an Airbus A350-1000 passenger aircraft at the Paris Air Show at on June 17. Photographer: Jason Alden/Bloomberg
“We are buying stakes in successful airlines and we will continue to do so,” he said, without naming a target company. “Soon you will hear about another investment.” DM In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.