For Eid-Al Fitr, Nakhlistan will feed akhni to over 85,000 people in need. Published originally by GroundUp . Thirty-five years ago on the evening before the Muslim holiday Eid-Al Fitr, Shukoor Mowzer and two friends started feeding the needy from two pots of food. The pots were borrowed from Mowzer’s mother and the food sourced from local shopkeepers and butchers. That was the start of the Nakhlistan initiative. Today, Nakhlistan has 300 volunteers cooking with 169 pots at Callies rugby grounds in Athlone, and feeding over 85,000 people.  Mowzer says that he got the idea in Mecca on pilgrimage. It was Eid, and all he had to eat was a dry roll and a Pepsi. He said to himself. “Never ever will I again have an Eid like this.” On returning to Cape Town, he started to make food and distribute it. Mowzer is now 60 and still involved, only leaving the cooking site at 6am. He says that the most important thing is to raise more funds as somebody needs to feed those in need. “If I could feed them every day, I would do it,” he says.  Fatima Allie, Nakhlistan’s public relations officer, said that when Mowzer and his friends started, they didn’t know what they were doing. “All they knew was that they wanted to cook food for people who didn’t have food”. She says that it started off as an Eid-Al Fitr feeding scheme, but now it is operational throughout the year. Nakhlistan is a Persian word meaning oasis, chosen because “an oasis provides sustenance in the desert”.  Nakhlistan is mainly sponsored by the community. Each of the 130-litre pots of akhni feeds 320 adults or 500 children. A total of 4.4 tons of meat, 4 tons of rice, 7 tons of potatoes, 2 tons of onions and lots of spices and other ingredients will be used. To sponsor a pot costs R3,000. “Even though we are a Muslim based organisation, we feed everybody,” says Allie.  To distribute the food, Allie says, they use existing networks such as the Mustadafin Foundation, another organisation that works with poorer communities. The food will reach areas from Atlantis to Ocean View. Allie says Nakhlistan plans to expand its cooking to 175 pots next year. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.