Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba leaves the City Council chambers after his state of the city address on 30 April 2019. (Photo by: Ayanda Mthethwa)    Less In an interview, Chainee said: “The City of Joburg, we give them about, what, R1.7bn every year, which is specifically aimed at addressing issues of water and sanitation.”  1 However, Mashaba has disputed this, saying that people in Alexandra have experienced “deep and historic” service delivery challenges.  1 He said the challenges were the reason he started a forensic investigation into the Alexandra Renewal Project (ARP).  2 Mashaba has now written to Sisulu to express his concerns about Chainee’s comments. “This said, as I am sure the minister is undoubtedly aware, the only kind of grant figure contained in the City’s balance sheet which resembles this allocation is our Urban Settlement Development Grant (USDG).  1 “The usage of the USDG allocations to municipalities is regulated for infrastructure projects relating to urban settlement,” said Mashaba. He said while the USDG included water and sanitation, it was not “specifically aimed at addressing issues of water and sanitation”.  1 Its intended usage also includes electricity and roads, he said, adding that he cited two significant examples. “Mr Chainee’s response is also highly problematic for the impression it gives that these funds are somehow exclusively available to Alexandra when they are required across the City of Johannesburg.  1 “Indeed, in the face of our inherited R170bn infrastructure backlog, grant funding provided to the City is woefully inadequate for meeting our needs,” said Mashaba.  1 Mashaba said that among the other issues he needed Sisulu’s clarity on, was whether USDG funding was aimed specifically at issues of water and sanitation.  1 He also seeks clarity on whether Sisulu would care to venture her opinion as to whether the USDG allocations to the City of Johannesburg could have, realistically, resolved the City’s entire infrastructure backlogs to date, including those of sanitation in Alexandra. DM  1 Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.