Eric Ntabazalila, the NPA spokesperson for the Western Cape region, confirmed that they had been notified and that the State had until June 14 to file opposing papers. Van Breda’s legal team was not able to confirm the application. News24 also contacted the Constitutional Court, which had yet to receive the papers. SCA dismissal Last month, Supreme Court of Appeal Judge President Mandisa Maya dismissed Van Breda’s latest application for leave to appeal his conviction and sentence. Judge Maya said: “No exceptional circumstances warranting reconsideration or variation of the decision refusing the application for leave to appeal have been established.” Three judges of the SCA had previously dismissed an initial application for leave to appeal in September 2018. His first bid was dismissed in the Western Cape High Court in August 2018. The Superior Courts Act allows applicants to petition the Judge President of the SCA on a decision already taken by three SCA judges. At the time, Van Breda’s attorney Lorinda van Niekerk said the dismissal was a disappointment, but that they would study the SCA’s outcome and consider a way forward. Intruder Van Breda was sentenced to three life terms in June last year for the murders of his parents and brother, and 15 years for the attempted murder of his sister.He received a further 12-month sentence for obstructing the course of justice.Van Breda had pleaded not guilty, blaming the crimes on an intruder who he claimed had breached their home in the De Zalze estate in Stellenbosch. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.