The SAWS warned that gale-force north-westerly winds of between 65km/h and 70km/h could be expected along the coast. “The cold front is still a little bit to the west of the country at the moment. It will make a closer approach by the evening – that is when the conditions are going to change,” SAWS forecaster Puseleso Mofokeng told News24. While there was sunshine in Cape Town on Thursday afternoon, the approach of the front was expected to result in strong winds and rain. “It’s going to become cloudy with a 60% chance of showers over extreme western parts,” said Mofokeng. Rough seas However, while the minimum forecast temperature is set at 10°C, no snowfall is expected as the front makes landfall. “The system will be too quick to have snowfall forming. We don’t see snowfall,” Mofokeng said. Data from Windy.com indicates that the wind speed ahead of the front is peaking at 40 knots (74km/h) and peak rainfall is 15mm. As a result of the strong winds, there will be rough seas around the Cape coast. “Between Cape Point and Cape Agulhas the seas will be quite rough. Waves will 6m high. But to the west coast – north of Slangkop – we are expecting waves of 4m to 5m,” said Mofokeng. There is also a high fire danger in the interior. According to the SAWS, some areas of the Northern Cape will be at risk of veld fires as a result of the front. “Most of the Northern Cape will have strong winds. It is also very dry.” He said this was combined with the winds. “We therefore don’t encourage the public to start fires. It’s going to be difficult to extinguish,” said Mofokeng. KEEP UPDATED on the latest news by subscribing to our FREE newsletter. – FOLLOW News24 on Twitter DM In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.