The gunmen opened fired as protesters demanding an end to military rule tried to cross a bridge from Omdurman to the twin city of Khartoum toward the Republican palace, Mohamed Hamdan Daglo, the deputy chairman of the Sudan Transitional Military Council (TMC) also who’s known as Hemedti, said on state television. There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the incident, and no word on the extent of the injuries. Read more: Sudan Military Rulers Accept African Union Proposal for Talks Tens of thousands of protesters marched in Khartoum and other cities to protest against the military leaders who seized power after ousting long-time President Omar al-Bashir in an April coup. The Sudanese Professional Association (SPA), a trade union organization, called for a sit-in outside the presidential palace. Separately, the Central Committee of the Sudanese Doctors said that a protester was been killed in Atbara, about 350 kilometers (217 miles) north of Khartoum. DM In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.