“It is with immense sadness that FlySafair confirms the passing of one of our customers who was in the process of boarding flight FA200 from OR Tambo International to Cape Town International Airport,” the airline said in a statement on Tuesday. The company said that the passenger had collapsed while boarding procedures were under way and that paramedics had immediately been called to assist.  1 “Our thoughts and prayers are with all connected to this person, and with those who witnessed this tragic event this morning,” said FlySafair.  1 The airline said that its flight to Cape Town was subsequently delayed, as well as the return leg, FA201. Safe Passengers aboard the flight had to disembark for police to conduct an investigation. Flying remains a relatively safe means of transport.  2 In a paper titled The Probability of Dying in a Plane Crash or Having a Safe Flight , by the Wroclaw University of Technology, the authors say the probability of dying on a flight is equivalent to the danger faced while driving about 60km.  1 According to a Deutsches Ärzteblatt publication from 2012, one medical incident per 10 000 to 40 000 passengers is estimated on intercontinental flights.  2 News24 In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.