By Nivedita Balu and Tina Bellon The company said it expects to record revenue of $210 million in 2019, with break-even earnings, before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA). Analysts on average forecast full-year sales of $205 million, and a loss, before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, of $10.28 million, according to Refinitiv IBES data. The company has captured a wide audience for its imitation meat patties and sausages made from ingredients like pea protein, coconut and canola oil. The burgers, a hit with consumers switching to a “flexitarian” diet, feel, smell and taste like real meat. Beyond Meat’s sales have increased five-fold since it began selling its flagship Beyond Burger in 2016. For an interactive graphic, click here https://tmsnrt.rs/2WWPsra “We are very conservative and view this as a floor,” Chief Executive Officer Ethan Brown said on a conference call when asked about the revenue forecast. The company does not count customers who are using its products as a part of a testing project. “As we are entering into additional test and distribution channels and take on new customers, those will be additive to our numbers,” Brown said. The company is also working on making its plant-based products cheaper than animal protein to capture more market share.  1 Beyond Meat, whose rivals include U.S.-based Impossible Foods, is likely to face increasing competition in the niche market as companies like Nestlé and Tyson Foods ready their own line of products. “Beyond Meat, right now, does have the first mover advantage,” said Megan Brantley, vice president of research at LikeFolio. The California-based company said net loss widened to $6.6 million in the three months ended March 30, from $5.7 million a year earlier. First-quarter net revenue came in at $40.2 million, an increase of 215%, the company said. Analysts had expected revenue of $38.9 million. “Beyond Meat is in a business that could be absolutely incredible,” John Gillin, an analyst with Stansberry Research, said. (Reporting by Nivedita Balu in Bengaluru; Editing by Maju Samuel and Cynthia Osterman) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.