The first attack occurred near the French Embassy on Tunis’ Charles de Gaulle Street, with the blast killing one policeman and wounding five others, the state-run TAP news agency reported, citing the Interior Ministry. The second attack struck near a building housing anti-terror police, wounding at least four people, TAP said. Authorities sealed off the streets leading to the area and television footage showed a heavy security presence in the city center, with assault weapon-wielding police officers guarding the scene. Suicide Bombing in Tunis Adds to Nation’s Political Crisis (1) The attacks were the first in the capital in about eight months and ushered in yet more uncertainty in a nation that has prided itself on its democratic gains since the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings, but has struggled to revive the economy. Tunisia in 2015 endured a spate of terrorist attacks targeting the vital tourism sector. While the assaults have abated, political bickering between rival parties, as well as frequent strikes by powerful unions, have combined to stunt recovery efforts. In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.