JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA ñ JANUARY 16: Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi, January 16, 2018 in Johannesburg, South Africa. (Photo by Gallo Images / Sowetan / Sandile Ndlovu) Gauteng MEC for Education, Panyaza Lesufi has a key focus for his next political term – Early Childhood Development. Addressing a full hall of educators, learners and SGB members at Nasrec, Johannesburg, Lesufi outlined the department’s road map for the next five years (2019-2024) and to also solicit input from relevant stakeholders. According to Lesufi, the department’s top priority in this political term is Early Childhood Development (ECD). This comes after “a political decision [was] taken to move ECD from the Department of Social Development to Education”. “All our primary schools must prepare to have two important grades – Grade RR and R,” Lesufi said. Considering the bugbear that is overcrowding, the MEC says that a team has been organised to restructure classrooms across all primary schools in the province. He added that ECD is a primary facet of fixing and building the education system emphasising that “if we can’t get ECD right, we won’t get the entire education system right”. Infrastructure is also on the department’s priority list. Lesufi said that there are 180 schools “that are about to fall”, with one school apparently, built next to a tunnel. These schools will undergo a rehabilitation programme supported by the department. Additionally, Lesufi said the department has invested money in rebuilding schools that have improper learning infrastructure (political speak for mobile classrooms and asbestos). He gave a three-year timeline, reassuring those in attendance that in the next three years, mobile classrooms will be extinct in all Gauteng schools. He also indicated that from now on the department will focus on producing “multi-certificated” learners. When a learner matriculates in Gauteng, according to the MEC, they will have more than one certificate that covers a broad range of skills including a learner’s licence, a swimming and gender education certificate. Considering the spate of violence in schools, the MEC pleaded with SGB members to strengthen disciplinary committees by ensuring that suitable and qualifying candidates are recruited. Furthermore, the department has, according to Lesufi, partnered with various stakeholders to handle the issue of bullying in schools. Educators have been tasked with identifying learners that are possible bullies to be referred to the department for assistance.DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.