* At least 42 others wounded in Sunday attack * Islamist militants targeted people watching soccer * Over 30,000 dead from Islamist insurgency since 2009 (Adds presidency, Amnesty International comments)  No group has yet claimed responsibility for the attack, which prompted President Muhammadu Buhari to call for security to be stepped up in areas where large groups gather. The Boko Haram group and its Islamic State splinter group have often carried out attacks targeting civilians and the military in Borno state. Their attacks during a decade-long insurgency have killed more than 30,000 people and displaced millions of civilians. “Yesterday (Sunday) around 8 p.m. (1900 GMT) it was reported that there was a very loud explosion in (village of) Konduga. On reaching the scene of the incident we found there was a lot of casualties. In fact the death toll was over 30 and the injured over 42,” an emergency service official told Reuters. Earlier the village head, Bulama Kalli, said three suicide bombers had taken part in the attack, targeting a place where villagers had gathered to watch a soccer match on a large screen. Most of those killed have now been buried while several survivors are still in hospital in Maiduguri, Kalli said. The military did not respond to a request for comment. Boko Haram regards soccer – often watched by Nigerians while drinking beer – as un-Islamic and a demonstration of corrupting Western influence. Konduga is located some 25 km (15 miles) from Maiduguri, the state capital of Borno state. Buhari’s spokesman said the president had called for security measures to be put in place at open air screenings. “He urges security agents to sustain surveillance in all theatres of security challenges in the country, taking into consideration the unconventional methods deployed by terrorists to harm innocent and unsuspecting victims,” spokesman Femi Adesina said in the statement. Buhari began his second four-year term last month after winning an election in February in which he promised to improve security in Nigeria. Nigeria’s government says Boko Haram and the rival Islamic State West Africa Province group have been largely defeated – that is, driven out of territory they once held – but they continue to launch attacks on civilian and military targets. “The Nigerian authorities must do more to protect civilians, especially in areas like Konduga that have frequently been targeted by Boko Haram,” Amnesty International said in a statement. (Reporting by Maiduguri newsroom Writing by Chijioke Ohuocha and Alexis Akwagyiram Editing by Mark Heinrich) Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.