There will be seven new MPs gracing the halls of Parliament from next week since space opened up for members to fulfil vacancies left by resignations and seats opening up within the ANC caucus. The Seven are: Fikile Masiko, Tshoganetso Tongwane, Nombulelo Lilian Hermans, Emily Manketsi Thlape, Judy Hermans, Lindiwe Mjobo and Sfiso Buthelezi. Buthelezi was on the board of the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) for four years, then became board chair for six years, ending in 2014. In a Cabinet Reshuffle in March 2017 by former president Jacob Zuma, he was appointed deputy finance minister. In that reshuffle, Zuma replaced finance minister Pravin Gordhan with Malusi Gigaba and deputy minister Mcebisi Jonas with Buthelezi. In 2018, he was shifted to the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries as its deputy minister. In May 2019, Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane released the second volume of the Chapter 9 institution’s investigation into maladministration into financial mismanagement as well as procurement and appointment irregularities at Prasa. Mkhwebane’s report had mentioned Buthelezi after allegations that he had failed to disclose that he was the COO of Makana Investments, which was a subsidiary of another company – Cadiz — which had provided advisory services to Prasa for its Rolling Stock Programme. The allegation was dismissed by the Public Protector, who stated that the allegation “is not substantiated by the evidence received”. Buthelezi was an economic adviser to president Zuma during his tenure as MEC for Economic Affairs and Tourism in the KwaZulu-Natal provincial cabinet, according to a previous report by Daily Maverick, Of the seven vacant MP seats, one became available following the election of Cyril Ramaphosa as the country’s President — he could no longer be an MP under parliamentary laws. Former Northern Cape premier Sylvia Lucas’ seat became available after she was elected as deputy chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP). Former ministers Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba (State Security), Susan Shabangu (Social Development) and Nomaindia Mfeteko (Human Settlements) had resigned from Parliament after they were snubbed from the sixth Cabinet in May. MP Makhosini Nkosi also did not take up his seat. The ANC Parliamentary caucus reported on Friday afternoon that former sports and recreation minister Tokozile Xasa had resigned from Parliament as an MP. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.