Anderson is No 8 on the ATP Tour standings, but received a higher seeding because Wimbledon organisers take into account players’ form on grass when they make their seedings. Anderson, last year’s runner-up at Wimbledon, has struggled with an elbow injury for much of 2019 and made his return to action at last weekend’s Queen’s Club Championships in London where he was beaten in the second round by Frenchman Gilles Simon. Anderson’s elevation means Austria’s Dominic Thiem, Germany’s Alexander Zverev and Greece’s Stefanos Tsitsipas are all bumped down one position. World No 1 and defending champion Novak Djokovic is the top seed on the men’s side, followed by eight-time champion and world No 3 Roger Federer. Rafael Nadal, the world No 2 and recent French Open champion, is seeded below Federer. On the doubles side, South Africa’s Raven Klaasen and his New Zealand partner Michael Venus are the third seeds . Klaasen and Venus were beaten finalists at last year’s Wimbledon. The women’s seedings do mirror the rankings with French Open champion Ashleigh Barty top of the pile for the first time at a Grand Slam ahead of Naomi Osaka. Defending champion Angelique Kerber is seeded fifth with seven-time Wimbledon champion Serena Williams down in 11th. In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.