The SIU went to court in 2014 seeking an order setting aside Makhanya’s appointment as principal agent and architect of the Nkandla project and damages of R155m, the SIU said in a statement on Tuesday. The unit is seeking to hold him personally liable for R155m of the roughly R245m spent on upgrades to former president Jacob Zuma’s Nkandla homestead. The trial was scheduled to commence on Monday, June 10 2019, at the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Pietermaritzburg. The SIU said it was ready to proceed but the court agreed to Makhanya’s request for a postponement to allow him more time to prepare his defence. The SIU will now apply for a new trial date, which will probably be set down for some time next year. The high court roll is frequently the reason for delays in SIU civil litigation, the unit’s head, advocate Andy Mothibi, said in the statement. “In order to address the cause for the delays, [President Cyril Ramaphosa] has issued a proclamation to re-establish the special tribunal, which will adjudicate on civil matters emanating from SIU investigations. The setting up of the special tribunal by the Department of Justice is at an advanced stage and is planned to commence its function in August 2019. “Once the special tribunal starts functioning, the delays in enrolling SIU civil litigation matters will be addressed and the recovery of monies and assets acquired in a corrupt manner will be fast tracked and be returned to the state,” Mothibi said. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.