Shoprite has announced that its proposal to buy out company founder Christo Wiese’s high-voting shares for R3.3bn received broad support in principle from shareholders, but not enough to allow the deal to go through. Consequently, it had been cancelled.  7 The announcement brings to an end a somewhat controversial proposal to convert Wiese’s high-voting shares into ordinary shares. Effectively that would have meant the company would issue new, ordinary shares to Wiese worth about R3.3bn and scrap the old, high-voting shares.  4 The board’s argument was that the deal would simplify the company’s voting share structure and align the company with international best corporate governance practice. This is because all the shares after the deal would have the same voting rights. This, the board said, would appeal to institutional investors and would have increased a positive demand for the company’s shares.  3 Wiese’s 305.6 million deferred shares — the high-voting shares in question —control 32.2% of Shoprite’s voting rights, and were issued to Wiese in the year 2000 at a nominal value of 0.1c a share. After the deal, the voting interest of minority shareholders would have increased from 57.7% to 82.2%. Or to put it another way, Wiese’s voting power would have come down from 42.3% to 17.8%, being 3% more than the 14.8% he currently holds.  2 The problem with the special shares is that it has already been agreed that they expire if Wiese’s shareholding in Shoprite falls below 10% — and they cannot be passed on. They were issued to Wiese personally as the company’s founder, after all. The deal required a 75% majority to pass, but some crucial shareholders, notably asset manager Coronation, which holds about 5% of Shoprite on behalf of clients, weren’t crazy about the deal. Karl Leinberger, Coronation’s chief investment officer told Business Maverick the proposal was an extremely high price to pay to extinguish what is, in reality, a comparatively low level of risk.  8 The result is that nothing changes with the company; Wiese remains its guiding force. Unless of course, he decides to sell. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.