Steam rises from the brown coal-fired power plant Niederaussem operated by RWE in Bergheim, Germany, 13 January 2017. EPA/SASCHA STEINBACH In 2018, coal was still the undisputed the king of commodities. According to accounting and consulting group PwC’s annual report on the global mining industry – presented to South African media at the Junior Mining Indaba in Johannesburg – “coal remains the largest revenue-generating commodity, supporting 38% of global electricity generation”. The report, which takes a deep dive in trends of the world’s top 40 mining companies, further noted that “Top 40 coal production has increased despite the sell-off of coal assets by some… Many parts of the world — eg China, India and South East Asia — are expected to continue to use coal to meet primary energy needs. The above average economic growth in these countries suggests that the coal demand will continue in the near to medium term.” These trends will raise understandable alarm bells among greens, given the concerns about the scientific link between greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuels such as coal and climate change. But there is a disconnect between the revenue generated by coal and the capital expenditure (capex) that is being put into the industry. According to PwC, coal last year accounted for 23% of mining revenue generated by the top 40 miners but only 15% of capex. Copper by contrast also reaped 23% of the big 40 revenue stream last year but accounted for 29% of capex. The reason for this state of affairs, according to PwC director Andries Rossouw, is quite simple: “No bank is funding coal projects at the moment … The concern is around the environmental friendliness. Banks don’t want to be seen as funding carbon economies. And you have to ask yourself the question, why they haven’t done that for the oil and gas companies.” Given coal’s outsized role in global power generation, that could change. With relatively little cash going to new projects, supply could become an issue, driving up prices to such an extent that bankers may just hold their nose while they write the cheques. But the PwC report sees coal consumption reaching a plateau in 2023 as renewable energy comes increasingly to the fore – and presumably this is a sector that bankers might not mind funding. On the issue of renewable energy, South Africa’s mines and new energy minister Gwede Mantashe went to bat for it and as well as coal. He told the conference that: “We are going to continue trying to find solutions to the biggest threat to the economy, that is security of electricity supply… To me it is not about killing coal and growing renewables, it is a silly debate, it is about promoting the various technologies that are at our disposal. It is a combination and co-existence of the various technologies.” He also encouraged investors in attendance to speak to the Council for Geoscience (CGS) – it falls under the minerals and energy department – as the CGS has reported finding new sources of coal. The big question is if any banks will make the cash available, especially in South Africa, where the combination of a tough operating environment and policy uncertainty – aspects of the Mining Charter are still being challenged in court – and coal could be regarded as positively radioactive. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.