President Donald Trump’s threat to impose tariffs on Mexican goods may boost expenses by $215 million to $1.07 billion, the Japanese automaker told dealers in a letter seen by Bloomberg. The mid-sized Tacoma could suffer because 65% of the pickups sold in the U.S. are imported from Mexico, the memo said. Toyota planned to deliver 246,000 Tacoma models this year, including 160,000 assembled in Tijuana, Mexico, it said. The remainder is produced at a factory in San Antonio, Texas.  1 In a pair of tweets on May 30, Trump warned of tariffs ranging from 5% starting June 10 that could ramp up in increments to 25% in October unless Mexico’s government stops immigrants from entering the U.S. illegally. Bob Carter, Toyota’s executive vice president for North America, sent the letter to U.S. dealers late Monday, saying the added cost projections are “rough estimates” and the full implications for the auto industry remain unclear. “This is not just an issue for our company. These tariffs will have an effect industry-wide,” Carter said in the letter, which noted General Motors Co. is the largest automotive importer from Mexico. He also said Toyota remains hopeful negotiations between the U.S. and Mexico on trade and immigration policy will lead to a deal that can be “resolved quickly.” News of the letter was first reported earlier Tuesday by Reuters. The notice to dealers comes as Toyota has taken an unusually public stand against the White House’s trade policy, saying last month that threatened tariffs against auto and car parts from Japan sent a message to the company that its billions of dollars of investments in the U.S. aren’t welcome. Those shifts in U.S. trade policy were flagged as a key risk in Toyota Motor Credit Corp.’s annual 10-K report filed on Tuesday. “Our business is substantially dependent upon the sale of Toyota and Lexus vehicles in the U.S. Changes in the volume of sales may result from governmental action or changes in governmental regulation or trade policies,” including “changes in import fees or tariffs on raw materials or imported vehicles,” the Toyota financial unit said in its filing.  1 Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.