South African Police members of the new Anti Gang Unit (AGU) march during the launch of the new unit in Hanover Park, Cape Town, South Africa 02 November 2018. EPA-EFE/NIC BOTHMA On Friday, 14 June, the Social Justice Coalition (SJC) marched to the Western Cape provincial legislature after having spent Wednesday and Thursday protesting outside the provincial head office of the South African Police Service. The protests were part of the SJC’s campaign to have more policing and better lighting in informal settlements. Standing on the steps outside the provincial legislature, the SJC’s secretary-general, Axolile Notywala, told about 100 marchers, “This is the safest place to be in the Western Cape. We are tired of people dying in the places that we live in.” Earlier that week, six Anti-Gang Unit members were shot and injured in Samora Machel. “We’re here to protest [about] the crime in our communities. If someone is stabbed, they can die on the spot. We’re tired of that. We can’t sleep in our houses because they are breaking [into] our houses. Our children are getting robbed, our children are getting stabbed. It’s a mess there. We’re still living in fear. People are shooting each other every day,” said Thando Phoswe from Khayelitsha. “The police [are] here to protect buildings. Yesterday, [at the SAPS provincial head office] there were more cops there to guard a building than there are in Khayelitsha,” said Notywala. Western Cape Premier Alan Winde was not present to accept the memorandum. Notywala made it clear that they would not be satisfied with just handing over a memorandum, they wanted the premier to commit to a date to hold discussions with them. One of the demands made on the memorandum was that “the National Police Minister and the National Police Commissioner commit to the development of visible policing guidelines for informal settlements”. The march was meant to end at 2pm, but marchers refused to disperse without at least speaking telephonically to the premier. After a back and forth between Notywala and representatives from the provincial legislature, an email, which Notywala read out, was sent from the premier’s office acknowledging receipt of the memorandum. The email concluded that the premier’s office “will revert with a way forward”. “We want commitment, there’s no commitment [to meeting the demands of the memorandum],” said Notywala. Eventually, at about 3.30 pm, Notywala received another email to “confirm that there will be a meeting on Tuesday at 11 am”. Notywala assured marchers that after his meeting with the premier he would issue an update. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.