The national broadcaster recently revealed its updated schedule for the event, which indicated that South Africa’s remaining matches would be split between delayed TV broadcasts and radio-only live coverage. Pay-channel SuperSport and the SABC previously announced an agreement to let the national broadcaster show certain matches during the tournament. South Africa’s first two matches against England and Bangladesh were shown live on SABC 3, but the remainder of their games (from the India clash) will only be broadcast live on Radio 2000 and some games delayed on SABC 3. The Proteas’ next match is against Afghanistan in Cardiff on Saturday, with SABC 3 to air a delayed broadcast from 09:30 on Sunday. All matches from the showpiece event in England and Wales will be broadcast live on SuperSport TV. Sport24 Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.