It confirmed on Monday that a shootout had taken place between soldiers and Mozambican border police officers on the border near Ndumo, KwaZulu-Natal, on Sunday at around 16:00. “Our soldiers were conducting a routine patrol as part of borderline protection when the incident occurred,” said SANDF spokesperson Brigadier-General Mafi Mgobozi in a statement. Mgobozi told News24 that a team was sent to KZN and had since returned to report back to the chief of the SANDF, General Solly Shoke, on Tuesday. “We sent a team, the team came back and reported. They confirmed that there was an incident that happened.” Mgobozi said following feedback from the team on the ground, a decision was made to send a high-level team so that the matter could be discussed further with their counterparts. While there are scant details of the incident, Mozambican media reported that two local border police officers were killed. Mgobozi reported that no SANDF soldiers were injured or killed. The SANDF could also not immediately clarify whether the shooting took place on South African or Mozambican soil. Mgobozi, however, confirmed that the area where the shooting occurred was in “no-man’s land”, between the border fences of both countries, adding that only South Africa had a border fence where the incident had occurred.  2 In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.