Key Developments:
The other contenders going into round two are: Michael Gove (37 votes), Dominic Raab (27), Sajid Javid (23), Matt Hancock (20), and Rory Stewart (19)
Brexiteers Andrea Leadsom and Esther McVey were eliminated, along with former chief whip Mark Harper
Home Secretary Sajid Javid says the Irish government is ‘key’ to finding a new deal
Raab Says He’s Just Getting Started (1:35 p.m.)
Dominic Raab, the fourth-placed candidate, said his result of 27 votes was “a good base to build on” as the contest progresses. “This campaign is just getting started,” he said. Rudd Sees Chance for Hunt When Members Vote (1:30 p.m.)
Work and Pensions Secretary Amber Rudd – who’s supporting Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt – told the BBC it looks almost certain Johnson will get to the final two candidates, but then the competition will reset. “It’s back to zero when we go to members,’’ she said. “And I hope that my man, Jeremy Hunt, wins.” Rudd also called for a more public debate between the contenders. “We could all benefit from a little more exposure of the leading candidates,” she told Sky News. “We’re not just choosing the next leader leader of the Conservative Party, we’re choosing the next prime minister.” Boris Johnson Tops Voting in First Round (1:05 p.m.)
Boris Johnson topped the ballot in the first round of voting to find Theresa May’s successor. The former foreign secretary won 114 votes. If he can hold onto those supporters in subsequent rounds he will win through to be one of the two candidates put to a national vote of grassroots party members. (See 12:45 p.m.) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.