 “Adv. Mkhwebane and her office will not comment on the contents of any news report or leaked document that purports to be hers as that could potentially jeopardise her investigations and prejudice the subjects of the probes [sic],” her spokesperson Oupa Segalwe stated. This relates to a report on IOL that last Thursday Ramaphosa received a draft copy of a report into Mkhwebane’s probe into a R500 000 donation from Bosasa to his election campaign for the presidency of the ANC. The publication claims that the report states that Ramaphosa may have breached the code of ethics by exposing himself to a risk of a conflict of interests. In the tweet, Segalwe said that the publication claims to have obtained a document leaked by a presidential confidant that is linked to an investigation she is carrying out following DA and EFF complaints against the president. He said reports of the Public Protector are released officially by Mkhwebane to complainants, respondents and the public in terms of S182 (5) of the Constitution, read with sections one and three of the Public Protector Act. The statement did not comment on whether the document was legitimate or not. When news of the payment to Ramaphosa’s son Andile from Bosasa surfaced last year via a question by opposition DA leader Mmusi Maimane, Ramaphosa told Parliament in October he had spoken to his son about it. He said there was nothing untoward about the payment. He was told his son had been paid for consultancy work for Bosasa, whose directors are in the spotlight for alleged corruption. His son afterwards said he had not received the claimed amount. Ramaphosa corrected himself in a letter to Parliament dated November 14, saying he had inadvertently provided incorrect information. News24 reported him as stating: “I have been subsequently informed that the payment referred to…does not relate to that contract. “I have been told that the payment to which the leader of the opposition referred was made on behalf of Mr Gavin Watson into a trust account that was used to raise funds for a campaign established to support my candidature for the presidency of the African National Congress.” – News24  Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.