Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, 6 February 2019. Photo: Leila Dougan/Daily Maverick Both complaints relate to the publication in December 2018 of an article by Moira Levy entitled, Gengezi Mgidlana, suspended Secretary to Parliament, objects to being called ‘corrupt’. The article had first appeared in Notes From The House. Daily Maverick and Notes from the House apologise: to Mgidlana for untruthfully / inaccurately / unfairly: stating as fact the following allegations: “Gengezi Mgidlana is the man who, among other dodgy practices, spent R4-million of taxpayers’ money in two-and-a-half years for travel for his wife and himself, awarded himself an ex-gratia payment of more than R71,000 that he was not entitled to, gave himself a R30,503 study bursary just months into the job while denying bursaries to most other staff, and various other dodgy behaviours such as the illegal use of blue light security cars, including to get his kids to school”; labelling him as “disgraced” and calling his actions “dodgy”; reporting that “…clearly somewhere, somehow, there is corruption afoot …”; not giving them a right of reply prior to publication; and not exercising the necessary care and consideration regarding his dignity and reputation. And to Parliament for: falsely stating that it had paid out bonuses to Mgidlana and other senior management; falsely stating that it had not offered an explanation for the alleged paying out of these monies; not reporting its denials to this effect; and not having contacted its spokesperson for comment. Visit www.presscouncil.org.za for the full findings.    In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.