FILE PHOTO: Democratic Alliance Chief Whip John Steenhuisen speaks during the 2017 State of the Nation Address (SONA) debate at the National Assembly on February 14, 2017 in Cape Town, South Africa. (Photo by Gallo Images / Beeld / Jaco Marais) The DA was gunning for the position of chair of Parliament’s Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa), the party made clear on Wednesday, 5 June 2019 at a briefing to announce its shadow cabinet for the sixth democratically elected Parliament. “I think they should be fair,” said DA Chief Whip John Steenhuisen. He was referring to the offer by the majority DA in the Western Cape of the position of Scopa chair to the ANC in the province. The ANC’s Lulama Mvimbi will become provincial Scopa chair. The DA is hoping the ANC will return the favour in choosing National Assembly MP Alf Lees to head Scopa. Its former chair, Themba Godi, did not gain enough votes with the African People’s Convention (APC) to return to Parliament. In the DA’s new shadow cabinet, Lees, the former shadow minister for finance, was moved into Scopa, alongside Benedicta van Minnen as his deputy. “We believe that he’d (Lees) make an excellent Scopa chair,” said Steenhuisen. The committee’s oversight role of public finances was “fast becoming important”. Lees was on Scopa from June 2014 to June 2015, before moving to the Standing Committee on Finance, where he remained until the lapse of the fifth Parliament ahead of the 2019 national and provincial elections. Scopa is Parliament’s oversight committee on public funds, which holds government departments and entities to account for the money that is allocated through the Treasury. It is a powerful position and unlike other parliamentary committees, is traditionally not held by not the majority political party, but rather by an opposition MP. Former chair Themba Godi had been Scopa chair since 2005. The DA announced its shadow cabinet a fortnight before the State of the Nation address, provisionally scheduled for 20 June 2019. The main opposition party comes into the sixth Parliament four seats weaker than the fifth Parliament.  Party leader Mmusi Maimane described the shadow cabinet as a combination of youth and experience. It includes: Maimane described the DA’s caucus as “really with a profound focus to demonstrate that the DA is the only alternative for South Africans”. The shadow cabinet will meet Maimane bi-weekly, with the party leader stating: “The purpose of these meetings will be to discuss the upcoming legislative agenda; to deliberate on new policies, debates, and motions; and to table any other matters.” The full DA shadow cabinet is available here. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.