By Andy Sullivan and Jan Wolfe As the House Judiciary Committee began the first of a series of hearings to examine Mueller’s findings, the Justice Department relented after nearly two months of stonewalling and said it would provide evidence related to Trump’s attempts to interfere with Mueller’s probe.  3 The committee still will not get to see a full, unredacted copy of Mueller’s report under the agreement, said Jerrold Nadler, the committee’s Democratic chairman. However, lawmakers will get to see interview notes and other evidence, including “first-hand accounts of misconduct,” Nadler said at the outset of the hearing. Nadler said he will hold off on a threat to bring criminal contempt charges against U.S. Attorney General William Barr. For weeks Barr had resisted a subpoena from Nadler’s committee to provide a full, unredacted version of Mueller’s 448-page final report and certain underlying evidence. The Democratic-controlled House of Representatives still will hold a vote on Tuesday that would increase pressure on Trump by allowing the committee to sue the administration in federal court if needed over access to the report.  2 Nadler said a lawsuit may yet be necessary and added that Tuesday’s vote may force former White House counsel Don McGahn, a central figure in Mueller’s report, to testify.  2 The Justice Department will continue to cooperate as long as Democrats hold off on their contempt vote, spokeswoman Kerri Kupec said. The agreement was announced hours before Nadler’s committee held a hearing featuring John Dean, whose testimony during the Watergate scandal helped topple former President Richard Nixon. Dean told the committee that Mueller’s report resembled a 1974 document that laid out the case against Nixon. “Mueller has provided this committee with a roadmap,” he said.  1 Trump called Dean, a former White House counsel, a “sleazebag” on Twitter. “Democrats just want a do-over which they’ll never get!” he wrote on Monday. Mueller’s investigation is one front in a broad battle between Trump and congressional Democrats, who are investigating his policies, conduct in office and private businesses. Trump has vowed to fight congressional subpoenas.  2 Released in mid-April, Mueller’s report found Russia meddled in the 2016 U.S. presidential election and that Trump’s election campaign had multiple contacts with Russian officials. But the report found insufficient evidence to establish a criminal conspiracy between the campaign and Moscow. The report also outlined 10 instances in which Trump tried to interfere with Mueller’s investigation but declined to make a judgment on whether that amounted to obstruction of justice. Barr has said he is required by law not to release evidence obtained from grand jury proceedings, and grand jury materials were redacted from the section of the report dealing with Russian interference in the election. But this was less of a concern for the section of Mueller’s report dealing with obstruction, which was based on testimony from voluntary interviews Trump advisers and other witnesses gave to Mueller, rather than grand jury testimony. Representative Doug Collins, the top Republican on the House Judiciary Committee, said the agreement indicates the Trump administration is not stonewalling Congress and said Democrats should focus on the threat from Russia.  1 “Democrats are abandoning their duty to confront foreign interference in our elections in favor of drawing out their slanderous campaign against the president,” he said. (Additional reporting by Makini Brice; editing by Kevin Drawbaugh and Bill Trott) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.