The winning team at the women’s World Cup in France, which starts on Friday, will receive $4 million in prize-money from the tournament’s total pool of $30 million. France banked $38 million for winning the men’s tournament in Russia last year. Professional Footballers Australia Chief Executive John Didulica and other PFA executives wrote to FIFA last week demanding an immediate doubling in prize-money for the women’s tournament, saying the players were “victims of discrimination.” “The PFA expressly reserves the rights of the players to have this matter resolved through appropriate means including mediation and arbitration,” the letter, addressed to FIFA’s Chief Officer for Women’s Football Sarai Bareman, said. The PFA have launched a website (www.ourgoalisnow.com) outlining the campaign’s aims and instructing women’s players how to participate. Australia’s ‘Matildas’, quarter-finalists at the last women’s World Cup in Canada, have thrown their weight behind the campaign, with players posting its logo and video on their social media accounts. Gender pay disparity in football was put in the spotlight in March when the U.S. women’s team sued the U.S. federation alleging gender discrimination three months before their World Cup title defence. Although prize-money at the women’s World Cup in France is double the amount from Canada, the pay gap with the men’s tournament actually increased to $370m from $343m. The men’s prize-money grew from $358 million at the 2014 Brazil World Cup to $400 million in Russia. FIFA is hosting its first “Women’s Football Convention” in Paris on June 6-7 where it said leaders from the world of sports and politics will discuss the development and empowerment of women in soccer. (Reporting by Ian Ransom; Editing by Peter Rutherford) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.