* France to stop selling diesel, gasoline-fuelled cars * Upholds Nicolas Hulot promise in new mobility law Former environment minister Nicolas Hulot said in July 2017 – at the beginning of President Emmanuel Macron’s term – that France aimed to end the sale of gasoline and diesel vehicles by 2040 in a bid to become carbon neutral by 2050. Hulot resigned in September 2018 in protest over Macron’s lack of commitment to environmental causes and the government has since rarely mentioned the planned ban, partly because of the “yellow vest” protest movement against carbon taxes on fuel prices and the high cost of living. Borne, who is a deputy to Hulot’s successor Francois de Rugy, confirmed in an interview with BFM television that the objective set out by Hulot would be met. “We have target for carbon neutrality by 2050 and we need a credible trajectory towards that, which includes a ban on the sale of vehicles that consume fossil fuels by 2040,” she said. She said France – which has a large car manufacturing industry led by PSA and Renault – would help its car makers switch to electricity, hydrogen and possibly biogas. “Since the start of Emmanuel Macron’s term, our target is the climate plan that Nicolas Hulot announced in the summer of 2017. We will now inscribe this target into law,” Borne said. The mobility law will also facilitate the rollout of electric vehicle (EV) charging stations, notably by giving the residents of apartment buildings the right to ask for the installation of EV plugs in their parking lots. The much-delayed law, which is currently being debated in parliament, is expected to be approved after the summer and will update a 1982 law on transportation. The reform wants to favour alternatives to individual automobile usage, upgrade railway networks and create a legal framework for new mobility solutions such as free-floating bicycles, electric scooters and car-sharing. It will also give companies the option to offer employees a tax-free 400 euro subsidy to come to work on bicycles or with car-sharing. Borne said companies would be obliged to discuss this subsidy in wage negotiations with unions, but the subsidy would not be mandatory for all companies. (Reporting by Geert De Clercq, editing by Ed Osmond)
DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.