(Bloomberg) — The series “Magic: The Gathering” will feature a new storyline that expands on the game’s power-wielding heroes, called Planeswalkers. The “Magic” franchise was launched more than two decades ago by publisher Wizards of the Coast, a company started out of a Seattle basement and later acquired by Hasbro. The trading card game has expanded into a digital format, a novel and a comic series. The Netflix series will be produced by a comic book nerd’s dream team: Joe and Anthony Russo of “Avengers: Endgame” and “Infinity War” fame, who have said they are “huge fans and players” of the game. And for the lead writers, Hasbro has hired Henry Gilroy of “Star Wars: The Clone Wars” and Jose Molina of “The Tick.” Since the June 2 announcement, Hasbro shares have posted the biggest two-day gain in more than a month. The stock rose 6.2% Tuesday. Wall Street is mostly bullish on Hasbro, with nine buy ratings, seven holds and zero sells. One of those bulls is MKM Partners analyst Eric Handler, who praised the project’s ability to attract big Hollywood names. “We believe ‘Magic: The Gathering’ has significant revenue and above average profit margin potential for Hasbro,” he said. “The franchise brand for Hasbro appears on a meaningful path for growth over the next 3-5 years.” Meanwhile, peer Mattel Inc. climbed 12% Tuesday after signing an international licensing agreement with Sanrio Inc. to develop toys and products inspired by long-time favorite Hello Kitty & Friends and other characters in Sanrio’s portfolio. Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.