South Africa National cricket team captains Faf du Plessis and Dane van Niekerk were each named Cricketer of the Year at Sun Arena, Time Square Casino in Pretoria. (Photo: Yanga Sibembe) Saturday night’s annual Cricket South Africa (CSA) awards came in what was arguably the poorest season to date for the South African cricket national teams in the 16 years since CSA first began rewarding outstanding performers. Both the women’s national team and their male counterparts failed in the two major competitions in the period; the women won just two of their four matches at the World T20 in the Caribbean in November 2018, failing to qualify for the semi-finals, while the men had a horrendous One Day International World Cup in England, winning only three of their nine matches. However, despite the tough season, the captains of the men’s and women’s teams, Dane van Niekerk and Faf du Plessis, led from the front, putting in decent performances as their charges laboured. And they were honoured by CSA for their efforts. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.