Move away from those mountains of boring potato salad! My Vegetarian Braai is a new recipe book containing different ideas and delicious recipes to satisfy the taste buds of every guest that sits at your table. Even meat-eaters will be seduced by these tasty vegetarian and vegan recipes, which also make brilliant side dishes to accompany any meal. Three-cheese Mushroom Pie This is an upgraded version of an old-fashioned mushroom pie. You can play around with any cheese as long as you use mozzarella as the main cheese. This pie can also be served as a snack with a glass of ruby cabernet. Ingredients Instructions Coat a baking tray with a little bit of olive oil and line the bottom and sides with the pastry. Use a fork to prick the pastry all over. Add the three cheeses and mushrooms, and then sprinkle with smoked paprika. Place on the braai grid over hot coals, cover with foil and a few hot coals, and bake for 20–25 minutes. Check regularly until the cheese is bubbling and the pastry is golden brown. Once the pie is cooked, remove it from the baking tray and add sea salt and pepper to taste. Garnish with fresh thyme and serve immediately. ML Adele Maartens is a self-taught chef who is passionate about everything to do with food. She has attended cooking courses in North Africa, Europe and the East, and others covering garagiste wine- and cheese-making. After seven years in the food trucking industry, many events and food festivals later, she has grown in her food adventures, become a food stylist, food photographer and now author of her first cookbook. Published by Penguin Random House South Africa, R325. Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including recipes! – daily. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.