(Bloomberg) –The jump to a three-year high in a gauge measuring sentiment in South Africa’s manufacturing industry may not be sustainable. Key Insights
The subindex for new-sales orders rose above 50 for the first time since December and the one for purchasing inventories the first time since January, boosting the overall PMI. These levels may not be sustained as it was likely driven by increased output by manufacturers to safeguard against potential strike-related disruptions in the automotive or platinum-mining industries, where wage negotiations are taking place, Absa said. While four of the five major sub-components registered were above 50, the lender said it’s unclear whether the improvement can be sustained because of concerns about the health of manufacturing globally. The index measuring expected business conditions in six months’ time declined to 54.5, the lowest level of the year, yet still positive. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.