 The investments could help Kuaishou and Baidu amass more content and fend off competition from ByteDance Inc., which is moving into search and drawing smartphone-savvy users to its popular short video and personalized news services. Through the financing, Baidu will add more than 100 million Zhihu Q&A posts to its main app, which is a combination of a search engine and news feed, Baidu said in a statement. ”We are all facing the same problem of an isolated island of information, and the cost of high-quality content is rising,” Zhihu Chief Executive Officer Zhou Yuan said on his own service after the investment was announced. Founded by coder-turned-blogger Zhou, Zhihu has evolved over the past eight years to become one of China’s most reputable social media platforms, known for its high-quality Q&As on everything from films to football and foreign policy. Zhihu is “recognized for its unique knowledge creation and sharing community,” Wang Lixing, a China Renaissance managing director, said in the statement. “The cooperation between Zhihu, Kuaishou and Baidu will create huge synergies and lay the foundation for long-term development.” To contact the reporters on this story:
Zheping Huang in Hong Kong at zhuang245@bloomberg.net;
Lulu Yilun Chen in Hong Kong at ychen447@bloomberg.net  In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.