Hong Kong’s financial markets are in one of their most volatile periods in years, and signs of a turnaround are few and far between. “It’s still too early to call the bottom,” said Raymond Chen, a portfolio manager with Keywise Capital Management. “The local incident looks far from being resolved,” he added, speaking about the months of anti-government protests that have rocked the city. Meanwhile, most Hong Kong retailers saw sales plummet in August, according to the city’s Retail Management Association. If you’re planning on travelling to Hong Kong soon, here’s what you need to know to get around and avoid the flareups. South Korea said it would withdraw from an intelligence-sharing pact with Japan, deepening their feud over trade measures and historical grievances. A South Korean security official cited Japan’s recent decision to remove South Korea from a list of trusted export countries, saying it “brought about a significant change to the environment of defence cooperation.” The pullout comes despite the urging of U.S. officials, including President Donald Trump, for the two allies to work together amid shared security challenges from China and North Korea. Here’s why Japan and Korea are locked in a trade war of their own. Stocks in Asia looked set for a muted start after a lacklustre U.S. session that saw traders adopt a cautious stance before Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell’s address at the Jackson Hole summit. The S&P 500 Index closed flat amid weak volumes, while Treasuries were volatile, with the benchmark 10-year yield climbing as three Federal Reserve policymakers voiced their resistance to the notion that the U.S. economy needs lower interest rates, and a fourth saying he wanted to avoid taking further action “unless we have to.” The dollar was steady, while crude oil slipped. China is taking “aggressive steps” to coerce Southeast Asian nations into halting work with international oil and gas firms in energy-rich waters off Vietnam, a State Department spokeswoman said. The deployment of a government-owned survey vessel with armed escorts “is an escalation by Beijing in its efforts to intimidate other claimants out of developing resources in the South China Sea,” she said. Asia’s 20 wealthiest families are now worth more than $450 billion combined, a testament to how the world’s economic growth engine is minting fortunes at an unprecedented level. Topping the list with a $50 billion fortune is India’s Ambani family, while the dynasties behind Samsung and Suntory also make the grade. Hong Kong clans make up 30% of the list. And where did all this cash come from? Most families on the list derive the bulk of their fortunes from property development or have holdings worth billions. See how Asia’s richest stack up against the wealthiest 25 families on the entire planet. This is what’s caught our eye over the last 24 hours. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.