Police deployed in crime-ridden areas in Mitchells Plain, Cape Town. (Photo: Gallo Images / Brenton Geach) “Is there anything to address these challenges?” Ferlon Christians, an ACDP member of the Western Cape legislature’s standing committee on safety, cultural affairs and sport asked about the province’s Policing Needs and Priorities (PNP) programme. The provincial department of community safety was briefed in the committee on the PNP programme on Tuesday 20 August. The PNP is a document which presents the efforts of the provincial department of safety “to determine the policing needs and priorities of the Western Cape within the broader context of policing and crime within South Africa”, said then MEC Dan Plato, as outlined in the 2017/2018 report. Yashina Pillay, chief director of the secretariat of safety and security in the department of community safety, said one of the biggest challenges the department had with the programme was that “it is unclear whether SAPS (South African Police Service), provincially or locally, incorporates the PNPs into their station’s plans.” Other challenges the programme faced included a lack of monitoring mechanisms to see if the PNP plans were incorporated into operational plans or annual performance plans by institutions. Christians questioned why the SAPS was not using the report: “If we don’t know that these plans are incorporated into SAPS, it is a big problem.” ANC member of the committee, Rachel Windvogel, questioned the department, asking if it had a strategy to address the challenges. The department said it had worked with more than 140 community policing forums across the province in five districts, except in the City of Cape Town, to allow the forums to engage with the plans. “The PNP process has enabled the department to regularly engage and consult with communities and capture their concerns. This has been brought to the attention of provincial and national authorities,” said Pillay. The committee agreed to call Pillay and other department officials back to give more input on the programme, once a new provincial police commissioner had been appointed. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.