Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technology, Dr Blade Nzimande on the red carpet shortly before the State of the Nation Address (SONA), 7 February 2019. Photo: Leila Dougan The SACP called on all sectors of society, regardless of their politics, to stand up to “parasitic” state capture and corruption.  1 “All South Africans who hate state capture and corruption: let’s come together and say enough is enough,” said the party’s secretary-general Blade Nzimande at its 98th anniversary gathering in Ermelo on Sunday.  1 “The difficulties [we are] facing today is largely because of the billions of rand stolen through state capture,” said Nzimande in a speech live-streamed by the SABC.  3 He said good public servants should be supported because they are being killed, maimed and harassed as they stand up to corruption, especially in local government.  1 “We are going all out to organise all South Africans who want peace to come together to come and defend this democracy against theft and corruption,” said Nzimande. Nzimande is also the Minister of Higher Education.  1 He said the SACP would inform its allies the Congress of SA Trade Unions and the ANC of its meetings to fight corruption, but would never seek permission from them on this issue.  1 He took a swipe at the EFF saying the opposition party is only targeting Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan because he is trampling on EFF supporters. He poked fun at the party’s “Louis Vuitton overalls” which are “very expensive”. He said people who never fought a single battle “like to talk about war”. He said the SACP has stood its ground on principles, and was not dead, as some claim. “We are not dead, here we are, we are alive.” However, he said the alliance movement was “under distress” as President Cyril Ramaphosa pursues wrongdoing.  1 He called on SACP members to join the ranks of the ANC “if it means saving the ANC from itself” and the counter-revolutionaries  “cominig from the inside”. DM  2 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.