Archive Photo: Then Communications Minister Faith Muthambi, 24/03/2017, Elmond Jiyane, GCIS The commission of inquiry’s report on editorial interference found that the SABC was a hostile work environment and that news coverage was influenced by former COO Hlaudi Motsoeneng, former Communications Minister Faith Muthambi and former board chair, Ellen Tshabalala. In 2016 Muthambi told the Parliament’s SABC inquiry that she never interfered with the SABC’s coverage as a communications minister. The report, which was written by veteran journalist Joe Thloloe and law firm director Stephen Tawana, found that there were “Cabinet Ministers, SABC Board members and senior executives, as well as  mid-level executives who ‘enforced’ the instructions from the top”. Phumzile van Damme told reporters outside a Cape Town police station on Thursday that Muthambi’s dishonesty in Parliament is “a clear violation of a law” which is why she laid a complaint on 8 August 2019. “The nature of the complaint is misleading Parliament, so in terms of the powers, privilege and immunities of MPs and provincial legislature it states that giving testimony to a committee in Parliament or ad-hoc committee in Parliament, you must be truthful and if you mislead it, it’s a criminal offence which if taken to court, you’d receive a fine or two years imprisonment,” said van Damme. The commission heard oral evidence in 58 hearings. One of the people they heard from was Busani Mthembu, who was the KZN provincial editor. Mthembu told the commission that in the run-up to the 2014 elections Muthambi “insisted that all her constituency visits to Willowfontein outside Pietermaritzburg be covered”, which led to more interesting stories being dropped. The commission also found that Muthambi threatened to fire staff. Thandeka Gqubule-Mbeki, who was the economics editor, described the working environment as an “egregious abuse of power”.  2 “We will pursue this relentlessly. We need to send a clear message to ANC politicians that South Africa will no longer be satisfied with politicians who mislead Parliament,” said Van Damme outside the police station. Muthambi currently chairs the portfolio committee of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and did not immediately respond to calls and messages for comment on Thursday morning. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.