Tony Jackman's spiced tomato and coconut cream soup. Photo: Louis Pieterse 1 large red onion, chopped 2 cloves garlic, smashed and chopped 3 Tbs extra virgin olive oil 2 bay leaves 1 star anise 1 stick of cassia or cinnamon 1 tsp ground cumin 1 red chilli, deseeded and chopped (discard the seeds) 1 x 410g can whole peeled plum tomatoes 1 x 410g can tomato puree 1 litre tomato cocktail juice 500 ml/ 2 cups vegetable stock 1 Tbs sugar (or more, to ‘cut’ the acidity of all the tomato) 1 can coconut cream (NOT milk) Serves 4 to 6 Saute the onions and garlic in olive oil until soft, with the bay leaves, star anise and cinnamon/cassia. Add the vegetable stock, chilli and tomato ingredients, bring just to the boil and simmer for at least half an hour for the tomato flavour to develop and to cook away much of the acidic bite of the tomato. Mash the whole tomatoes with something blunt, or a masher, or a knife (which I find does the job). Add 1 Tbs sugar, stir and taste. Add more if needed; it’s right when the acid has been tamed. Add the coconut cream, return to a simmer and let it cook for 10 to 15 minutes while flavours develop and the soup reduces a little. Allow to cool to room temperature, then blend to incorporate any stray bits of the whole tomatoes. Let it stand for a few hours before serving, or even overnight; this will improve the flavours and texture quite pleasingly, as I discovered, just as a curry tastes better the day after it’s made. Then reheat it, and serve with the following drizzle: Make a drizzle of very finely chopped coriander (dhania/cilantro) leaves, picked from their stems, mixed with olive oil and a squeeze of lemon, adding a little salt and pepper. Drizzle on top of the soup before serving. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.