The main opposition Movement for Democratic Change said Wednesday it will proceed with a demonstration in the capital, Harare, and four other cities because of the dire economic situation. The southern African nation is grappling with shortages of cash, fuel and electricity, as well as one of the world’s highest inflation rates. Opposition activists have been mobilizing residents to join the protests and sacks with catapults have been found, the police said in a statement Thursday. All vehicles without registration numbers will be impounded, it said. To contact the reporter on this story:
Ray Ndlovu in Johannesburg at rndlovu1@bloomberg.net To contact the editors responsible for this story:
Paul Richardson at pmrichardson@bloomberg.net
Pauline Bax, Andre Janse van Vuuren In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.