Zozibini Tunzi was crowned Miss South Africa 2019 at the Time Square Sun Arena in Pretoria. (Photo: Gallo Images / Frennie Shivambu) Rumour has it that Sun International is looking to sell the rights to the Miss South Africa beauty pageant. This week Business Maverick was told it already has – to a private company called Weil Entertainment.  1 That is according to Stephanie Weil. She states the Miss South Africa trademark now belongs to her company, which she says she co-owns with Carmen Paul.  3 She says the transaction was concluded more than two months ago, but the deal has been in negotiations since late 2018.   1 When asked for official proof of the claim – as Sun International has yet to make a public statement in this regard – she was unable to do so. She did, however, make reference to media reports, which earlier in 2019, announced that Cell C was withdrawing its sponsorship from the pageant. The mobile operator said it wanted to better align its CSI initiatives with its core business. Sun International told Rapport and City Press that the registration process would be delayed until new sponsors could be found. Both the future of the pageant and Sun International’s commitment to the cause were called into question by the publications, which also revealed Weil’s claim that she was the new managing director of the competition.   2 “We will manage the pageant in partnership with Sun International, which will still be involved as a partner and sponsor,” she said. Statutory records, however, are less open to these interpretations. CIPC records show that Stephanie Weil is the sole owner and director of Weil Entertainment. She is also a director of Nine Squared Communication, which was appointed as Miss South Africa’s public relations firm in 2013, according to Weil. Company records further indicate that Sun International board member Norman Basthdaw is the only named director of Miss SA Pty Ltd, the registered company in which the trademark is housed and that the intellectual property still belongs to Sun International, and has been for almost 20 years. There is also no record of a sale agreement signed or evidence of cash changing hands. Weil was also not willing to reveal a purchase price. What does exist, and of which Business Maverick has a copy, is an offer to purchase from a consortium of 43 former Miss South Africa title- holders for an undisclosed amount.  1 Leading the bid is 2009 winner Tatum Keshwar. She heads up the steering committee of Miss SA Investment Holdings together with Cindy Nell (Miss SA 2002), Kerishnie Naicker (1997) and Claudia Henkel (2004).  1 Emails show they have been in talks with members of the Sun International team, and, according to Keshwar, the bid is being considered by Sun International. Keshwar said her team was “cautiously optimistic of a positive outcome”. So is there proof in the paper trail or has truth been told? According to Basthdaw, Weil Entertainment is indeed the brand’s new owner. He says the paperwork will be finalised in the near future. But related parties at Sun International are yet to reveal its position to the consortium or the public. Asked to explain who the buyer was, a Sun International spokesman referred to Weil Entertainment and would say nothing more.  3 It’s a curiosity, but obviously, the situation is as yet unresolved. BM  1 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.