* Women had planned visit to Jerusalem, West Bank * Both back pro-Palestinian movement to boycott Israel * Israeli law allows banning entry of boycott supporters * Trump had urged Israel to bar visit (Adds Trump quote, Ben-Ami quote) By Maayan Lubell and Patricia Zengerle Tlaib and Omar, the first two Muslim women elected to Congress, are members of their party’s progressive wing and sharp critics both of Trump and of Israel’s policy toward the Palestinians. The moves, which were immediately condemned by many Democratic leaders in the United States as well as Palestinians, could help whip up support among Trump and Netanyahu’s conservative voter bases as they head into election campaigns. Israel holds a national election on Sept. 17 and Trump faces re-election in November 2020. Tlaib and Omar have voiced support for the pro-Palestinian Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) movement over Israel’s policies toward Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Under Israeli law, BDS backers can be denied entry to Israel. Omar called Thursday’s decision an “affront” and “an insult to democratic values.” Israel had initially chosen to allow the visit. A source who took part in consultations Netanyahu held with cabinet members and advisers on Wednesday told Reuters that Israel backtracked due to pressure from Trump. The pressure was reported by the Axios news site on Saturday but denied by the White House. “In a discussion held two weeks ago all the officials were in favor of letting them in but, after Trump’s pressure, they reversed the decision,” the source said, speaking on condition of anonymity. In a tweet on Thursday, Trump wrote: “It would show great weakness if Israel allowed Rep. Omar and Rep. Tlaib to visit … They are a disgrace!” Asked if he had spoken to Netanyahu about the planned visit, Trump told reporters: “I don’t want to comment about who I spoke to, but I think my social media statement pretty well speaks for itself.” “But I did speak to people over there,” he added. Trump’s request appeared to contravene a U.S. government policy that says the United States seeks “equal treatment and freedom to travel” for all U.S. citizens regardless of ethnicity. It says those denied entry should be given a written explanation by Israel. Trump has in recent months accused Tlaib, Omar and two other first-term Democratic congresswomen of color – dubbed “the Squad” – of hostility to Israel in a barrage condemned by critics as racist and widely seen as a way to drum up votes for 2020. Omar is a favorite target. At a recent rally in North Carolina, supporters chanted “send her back” after Trump falsely accused her of supporting al Qaeda. The 37-year-old lawmaker who represents a Minnesota congressional district immigrated to the United States from Somalia as a child. U.S.-born Tlaib, 43, has roots in the West Bank. Omar has been criticized for statements critical of Israel, including a 2012 tweet referring to the country’s “evil doings” and a tweet this year saying that support for Israel is all about money. Omar has apologized for such statements. Israel’s ambassador in the United States, Ron Dermer, had said last month that Tlaib and Omar would be let in, out of respect for the U.S. Congress and the U.S.-Israeli relationship. Jeremy Ben-Ami, president of the liberal Jewish advocacy group J Street, said Trump’s strategy was about appealing to his conservative base, which includes evangelicals hawkish on Israel. “This not a strategy that is primarily aimed at the Jewish community,” Ben-Ami said. “It’s become another culture war issue.” ‘DENY ISRAEL’S LEGITIMACY’ No date had been formally announced for the congresswomen’s trip, but sources familiar with the planning said it could begin over the weekend. They had planned to tour East Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank, territories Israel captured in the 1967 Middle East war, which Palestinians want for a state. Netanyahu said that Israel had the utmost respect for Congress but that Tlaib and Omar were promoting legislation calling for boycotts against Israel. “Only a few days ago, we received their itinerary for their visit in Israel, which revealed that they planned a visit whose sole objective is to strengthen the boycott against us and deny Israel’s legitimacy,” Netanyahu said. Netanyahu could easily feel he owes Trump a favor after some of the U.S. president’s decisions, such as recognizing Israel’s sovereignty over the Golan Heights, withdrawing from the Iran nuclear accord and moving the U.S. embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. However, denying entry to elected U.S. officials was likely to further strain relations between Netanyahu, who has highlighted his close ties with Trump in his current re-election campaign, and the Democratic leadership in Congress. “Israel doesn’t advance its case as a tolerant democracy or unwavering U.S. ally by barring elected members of Congress from visiting because of their political views. This would be a shameful, unprecedented move,” Democratic presidential hopeful and U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren said on Twitter. U.S. Senator Chuck Schumer, the Senate’s top Democrat, said in a statement: “Denying entry to members of the United States Congress is a sign of weakness, not strength. It will only hurt the U.S.-Israeli relationship and support for Israel in America.” Hanan Ashrawi, a senior Palestinian official with the Palestine Liberation Organization and founder of Miftah, a West Bank-based nongovernmental organization that is co-sponsoring the trip, called the decision to block it “an affront to the American people and their representatives.” “This ban is a clear case of discrimination and hostility based on political views and ethnic background, deserving of moral indignation and unequivocal condemnation in Palestine and the United States,” Ashrawi said in a statement. The Palestinians have broken off diplomatic ties with the Trump administration over what they see as its heavily pro-Israel bias. Tlaib’s grandmother and extended family live in the Palestinian village of Beit Ur Al-Fauqa. “We were surprised today that they banned Rashida. It is unfair and racist that they banned her from visiting her country Palestine and her family in Palestine,” said her uncle, Bassam Tlaib. Netanyahu said that if Tlaib submitted a request to visit family on humanitarian grounds, Israel would consider it as long as she promised not to promote a boycott against Israel. (Reporting by Maayan Lubell, Rami Ayyub, and Jeffrey Heller in Jerusalem and Makini Brice, Steve Holland, James Oliphant and Patricia Zengerle in Washington Writing by John Whitesides Editing by Frances Kerry, Sonya Hepinstall, Jonathan Oatis and Cynthia Osterman) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.