Cape Town – South African rugby players – men and women, schoolboys and adults – were congratulated for Saturday’s national team hat-trick by Mark Alexander, president of SA Rugby, on Sunday. The Springboks overcame Argentina, 24-18; the Springbok Women defeated Kenya, 39-0; and the SA Schools team beat England U18, 33-26. “Saturday was a very satisfactory day for South African rugby,” said Alexander. “We had national teams in action in Pretoria, Brakpan, and Wellington – all of them in important matches and all of them came through. “I’d like to congratulate our men and women players and our schoolboys on their successes. It’s not often that we have three national teams playing on the same day and to have them all victorious is cause for some pride. “In particular I’d like to congratulate the Springbok Women on their qualification for the 2021 Women’s Rugby World Cup.” The Springbok Women booked their trip to New Zealand in 2021 in the deciding match of the Rugby Africa qualifiers at the Bosman Stadium in Brakpan. The win completed a clean sweep of victories during which the team conceded only five points and scored 201 from its three matches, which also included appearances against Uganda and Madagascar. The SA Schools team similarly won all three of their matches, preceding their victory over England with wins over Argentina (48-14) and Wales (23-13). While the SA Schools ‘A’ team also performed admirably against first-choice international opposition, drawing against Wales (31-31) and being competitive for long periods in defeats by Argentina (27-12) and France (43-19). And the Springboks wrapped up their domestic playing preparations for the Rugby World Cup with a 24-18 victory over Argentina in a Castle Lager Incoming Test match, following their emphatic clinching of the Castle Lager Rugby Championship a week before. “I’d like to congratulate all the players, their coaches and the management staffs on their success,” said Alexander. “And I’d also like to acknowledge and say ‘thank you’ to all the unseen heroes at school and provincial level who volunteer to provide a playing platform and opportunities in so many different ways and at different stages of a player’s career for these young men and women. “These are challenging times in so many ways – economically and socially – but their contribution ensures the enduring strength of rugby. I believe that is something we should celebrate.” Sport24 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.