Uber has unveiled the list of speakers for their upcoming Tech for Safety Summit, taking place at The Park House of Events, Hyde Park in Johannesburg on August 16 2019. In the spirit of Women’s Month, Redi Tlhabi will be the master of ceremonies as the country’s most prominent leaders, corporates, start-ups and innovators come together to explore South Africa’s safety challenges and how technology can be used to build safer communities now and in the future Uber’s Global Senior Director of Product, Sachin Kansal, will open the event.  “Uber serves millions of riders and drivers across the globe and we care about their safety. We have made big strides in the last few years and we continue to innovate.” The Summit will also feature three panel discussions focusing on Tech for Community Safety, Tech for Road Safety, Tech for Start-ups Safety, including a keynote address from Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies and a fireside chat between Alon Lits, Uber Sub Saharan Africa General Manager and Country Duty founder, Tumi Sole, exploring how tech can leverage social media for safer communities. The Tech for Community Safety panel will be moderated by Redi Thlabi and include top speakers such as Luke Kannemeyer, Head of growth for SweepSouth, Microsofts’ Area Solution Architect: Middle East and Africa, Mitesh Chotu, Facebook’s Public Policy Lead for Southern Africa, Emilar Gandhi and General Riah Phiyega, The Chief Executive Officer of The Safer South Africa Foundation.  Panelists will address how their companies are integrating tech and safety with communities and explore development opportunities. The Tech for Road Safety panel will be moderated by tech guru, Aki Anastasiou and includes top speakers such as Ilan Ossin, Head of Telematics for Discovery Insure, Toby Shapshak, technology journalist and speaker, Patrick Henchie, Head of products for Nokia Sub-Saharan. Panelists will discuss how technology can make our roads safer and improve the driving and commuting experience for all riders and road users, while debating development opportunities. The Summit aims to create a collaborative discussion, whereby solutions can be conceptualised and developed across the country. Networking opportunities will allow participants to connect with like-minded leaders in the industry. Winners of Uber’s Hackathon which took place on 3 and 4 August, will present their technology solution to enhance personal safety at the Tech for Safety Summit.  07:30 | COFFEE & MUFFINS  8:30 | WELCOME Redi Thlabi, Talkshow show host, broadcaster and award-winning author  8:40 | OPERA BY UBER Menzi Mngoma: Opera Singer and Uber Driver Partner  8:50 | OPENING REMARKS Nduduzo Nyanda: Uber South Africa Country Manager  09:00 | KEYNOTE: HOW UBER ADDRESSES SAFETY FOR ALL USERS Sachin Kansal: Uber Global Senior Director of Product  9:50 | AM COFFEE  10:20 | SOCIAL MEDIA FOR SAFETY: COUNTRY DUTY Tumi Sole: Founder of Country Duty Alon Lits: Uber SSA GM A fireside chat between Uber SSA GM and Country Duty founder exploring how tech can leverage social media for safer communities and sharing Country Duty success stories  10:50 | PANEL: TECH FOR COMMUNITY SAFETY Luke Kannemeyer: SweepSouth: Head of Growth General Riah Phiyega: Safer South Africa Foundation: Chief Executive Officer Mitesh Chotu: Microsoft: Area Solution Architect MEA Michael Lever: Metagrated: Director Emilar Gandhi: Facebook: Public Policy Lead, Southern Region Moderator: Redi Tlhabi, Talkshow show host, broadcaster and award-winning author How can technology make our cities safer – for women, the marginalised, and our communities? Panellists address how their companies are integrating tech and safety with communities and explore development opportunities  11:50 | KEYNOTE: SOUTH AFRICA AND TECH FOR SAFETY Ms Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams: Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies  12:20 | LUNCH  13:20 | TECH FOR ROAD SAFETY Ilan Ossin: Discovery Insure: Head Telematics Sachin Kansal: Uber Global Senior Director of Product Patrick Henchie: Nokia: Head of Products SSA Toby Shapshak, technology journalist and speaker Moderator: Aki Anastasiou, Technology Influencer How can technology make our roads safer – and improve the driving and commuting experience for all riders and road users?Panellists address the role of their tech company in keeping our roads safe, road and traffic integration and debate development opportunities  14:20 | PM COFFEE  14:50 | TECH START-UPS FOR SAFETY Warren Myers: Aura CEO Mbali Ndhlovu: Founder: IKAG 5 start-ups x 5 minutes: In 5 rapid-fire presentations in front of an audience of VC’s, Tech start-ups share what they’re doing for safety and what they need to move forward.  15:30 | TECH FOR SAFETY HACKATHON WINNER Thabi Poopedi: Uber Sub Saharan Africa Safety Lead A debrief on the first-ever Uber Tech for Safety Hackathon: the winners of the Hackathon will share how they solved the Hackathon challenge and demo their solution.  16:00 | CLOSING REMARKS – TECH FOR SAFETY FOR THE FUTURE Alon Lits: Uber SSA GM  16:30 | SUNDOWNERS  Due to the limited availability of seats, early registration is strongly recommended to ensure access to the event. Send your full name, designation, company, email address and contact number to rsvp@ubertechsafety.co.za DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.