 The gunman remained barricaded inside the house with police urging him to surrender. The SWAT team also evacuated suspects who police had arrested during the raid, and who were then also trapped in the home, police said. The SWAT team moved in about five hours into the standoff that began after the man opened fire on officers as they served a drugs warrant in the north Philadelphia home. “The officers and additional prisoners that were inside of the house with the shooter were safely evacuated. The shooter remains armed inside,” Philadelphia Police Department Commissioner Richard Ross tweeted. All the wounded officers were in stable condition with non-life-threatening injuries, with television images showing several of them leaving hospital on Wednesday night, one with a bandaged head and arm. “Many of them had to escape through windows and doors to escape from a barrage of bullets,” Ross told a news conference. The shooter continued to fire on a SWAT truck parked outside the residence in the Nicetown-Tioga neighborhood, with rounds hitting a building across the street, as officers tried to negotiate his surrender, Ross said. Police called the man’s phone, talked with him on a bullhorn and involved a family member in the negotiations, Ross added. “We are trying to get him to come out peacefully,” Ross said. Ross said the trapped officers inside the home were holding people they arrested during the raid. The officers and suspects were pulled out of the home safely, Ross said. Police told local residents to remain inside their homes and stay out of the area after hundreds of rounds were exchanged. There were reports the shooter was livestreaming the incident on Facebook. President Donald Trump has been briefed on the shooting and was monitoring the situation, the White House said. Local media reported the shooter appeared to have a high-powered weapon and a significant amount of ammunition. The incident follows a string of mass shootings in California, Texas and Ohio in which gunmen used semi-automatic rifles. “I’m a little bit angry about someone having all that weaponry and all that firepower, but we’ll get to that another day,” said Philadelphia Mayor Jim Kenney after visiting three of the wounded officers in hospital. (Reporting by Andrew Hay and Alex Dobuzinskis; Editing by Cynthia Osterman, Sandra Maler and Lisa Shumaker) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.