Harkous, one of the most experienced players of the EA Sports simulation in the tournament but not one of the favourites, won 3-2 over two legs at London’s O2 Arena. The first leg, played on the Xbox format ended 1-1 but Harkous edged the PlayStation leg 2-1. Millions of players around the world had started off hoping to reach the London finals where the top-32 have been in action since Friday — the 58 hours of action streamed live in six languages across social media and leading broadcasters. Harkous, a professional gamer for Werder Bremen, paraded around the stage holding aloft a German flag. “I just hope I don’t wake up,” he said minutes after putting down his joystick. “It’s crazy. I didn’t expect this and it’s unbelievable. “I came here without practising much because it’s the end of the season. But I beat Msdossary so it’s crazy. “I don’t think I’m that good. You need to have luck and to be in great form,” he added before receiving his award from Crystal Palace forward Wilfried Zaha. Harkous was Germany’s first champion of the tournament that began in 2004. “He deserved the win,” Saudi Arabia’s Aldossary said. “I’ll be back next year.” (Reporting by Martyn Herman, editing by Pritha Sarkar) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.