According to the 2017/2018 SAPS crime statistics, the number of drivers arrested for driving under the influence in Cape Town rose by 8.1% compared with the 2016/2017 results. (Photo: Andrew Brackin / Flickr) More Capetonians are being caught for drunken driving. That’s according to the City of Cape Town’s metro police head, Wayne le Roux, who told the City’s Safety and Security Committee that in the past year, according to the 2017/2018 SAPS crime statistics, the number of drivers arrested for driving under the influence rose by 8.1% compared to the 2016/2017 results.  1 And in just three months, from April to June 2019, there were 957 arrests for reckless and negligent driving.  1 Between July 2018 and June 2019, two million SMS messages were sent to motorists informing them of their outstanding fines. “We’re fully in control of the execution of warrants but the voluntary payments, we’re going to have to monitor that,” Le Roux told the committee on Wednesday, 7 August. In total there were about 54,000 outstanding fines. Taxi operating licences ANC councillor Khaya Yozi asked about the slow process of issuing taxi operating licences, which he said left Uber and Taxify drivers “sitting with huge frustrations that they’re not given permits. They are losing money.” Uber and Taxify drivers who were found to be operating without an operating licence risked having their cars impounded. Yozi told the committee that one driver he spoke to told him he had tried to get an operating licence, “but there was no response and he was told that they [the provincial regulatory authority] were short-staffed”. The Mayco member for Safety and Security, JP Smith, told Yozi the issue of operating licences “could be asked in the Transport Committee”. However, Smith said he didn’t think the issue with the province’s regulatory entity, which issues the operating licences, was staff shortages. Rather, Smith said, it was that the province could be reluctant to issue operating licences because there were cars “flooding certain areas” and this could lead to “unhealthy competition”.  1 Smith said drivers had asked that “we suspend impoundments. We can’t do this. It’s like someone being allowed to walk around with a firearm while they wait for their licence.” The issue of having an operating licence also extended to minibus taxi drivers and which routes they were allowed to use.  1 “The first thing we ask is ‘Show me your licence’, which clearly shows which routes they need to take. If anyone was operating without an operating licence they are immediately arrested and their cars impounded,” said Le Roux. Smith described the operating licences as a “complex matter” that also needed to consider “internal taxi politics”. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.