The Public Protector, Busisiwe Mkhwebane, took her opportunity during an address and panel discussion at the University of the Western Cape (UWC) to defend herself from the barrage of criticism she has faced from the local media. “I have had journalists calling me a moron,” said Mkhwebane whose credibility as a public protector has been intensely scrutinised after several of her rulings were overturned by the courts, one of which is the investigation into the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) and ABSA where she was accused of lying under oath and eventually received a personal cost order to pay 15% (R900 000) of SARB’s legal fees.  1 Mkhwebane renounced allegations made against her that she is “captured by the Guptas” and is a “spy beholden to Zuma” all the while insisting that the media was partial and colluding against her. “There was an article that called me a criminal and a servant of criminals,” said Mkhwebane, adding that journalists had interviewed her mother without her permission. The panel included Right2Know’s Deputy National Co-ordinator, Ghalib Galant as well as journalist and political analyst Prince Mashele, who dug into Mkhwebane during the discussion. “I don’t buy this projection of the public protector as a victim,” said Mashele. In response, Mkhwebane described the threats she has received. “Threats to silence me, poison me, because I am touching a nerve,” she said. “The people who we’ve found wanting are the ones who say we are targeting them.” Some of the students present stood up to support Mkhwebane, during the question and answer session, with one student asking how the public protector has coped in a “white, racist, sexist office”. “The woman block of the country, is faithfully behind you, because you are touching a nerve,” she said. Another student accused, panellist Mashele of being a “white media puppet”. “This is how you unclothe an agent,” he said, invoking an apartheid-era term to paint Mashele as a black person with an anti-black agenda. Galant pointed out that the flood of negative news directed at Mkhwebane, could not have just appeared out of thin air. “There may be some truth in what the media is saying,” said Galant, who also cautioned young audience members to practice discernment when presented with information. “We need to read, analyse and from the facts make-up our minds.” DM See also here: Public Protector claims she walks in the footsteps of her predecessors In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.