 Here are three of the ways traders are making money in a negative-yielding world: Borrowing over a relatively short time period and putting the money in longer maturities where yields are typically higher is one strategy to produce returns even when rates are below zero. The way to maximize returns from doing this is to use a “carry and roll” strategy. The “carry” is the coupon of the bond being bought, while the “roll” is the capital appreciation that can be earned on the security as it slides down the yield curve toward maturity. The chart above shows how traders can make a positive return through carrying and roll in the Spanish bond market, even though yields of up to eight years to maturity are below zero. They can borrow at the Spanish three-month repurchase rate, currently around minus 0.4%, and earn around 4 basis points for three months in combined carry and roll by buying seven- or eight-year debt. Another way to extract returns from negative-yielding bonds is through currency hedging. Rising demand for dollars means investors who can have funds in the U.S. currency can generate positive returns from sub-zero yields in Europe and Japan.  1 Lending dollars for yen via three-month currency forwards earn an annual yield of almost 2.60%. The investor can then plug the money into a haven asset, such as Japanese 10-year bonds, which yielded minus 0.235% late Thursday in Tokyo, making a return of about 75 basis points above that of 10-year Treasuries. Do the same thing except for borrow in euros and an investor can earn more than 2.70% a year from German bonds. If the money is invested into Italian debt, the return surges to over 4%. The focus on the shape of the curve is also key for investors. A steeper one creates the opportunity to borrow in the short term and invest in longer maturities. In Japan, the six-month yen Libor rate — the price at which banks theoretically borrow from each other — is minus five basis points, whereas the 20-year yen swap rate is positive 11 basis points, offering a pick up of 16 basis points. Contrast this with the U.S., where six-month dollar Libor is about 2.03% and the 20-year swap rate is being quoted at just 1.59%, around 40 basis points lower. The flattening of the U.S. curve may end up sending funds to a number of other markets that offer a steeper alternative — just one of the ways traders are looking to get creative as the amount of negative-yielding debt swells to new records.  1 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.