ANC Secretary General Ace Magashule announced members of the newly formed Western Cape Provincial Interim Committee during a press briefing at Constitution House (Cape Town) on 15 August 2019. Photo: Sandisiwe Shoba A short wait — by ANC standards — led to the announcement the Western Cape has been waiting for in Cape Town on Thursday afternoon. ANC Secretary-General Ace Magashule’s scheduled lunchtime media briefing to announce the interim committee of the ANC in the province was delayed by three hours when his meeting with the new committee ran longer than expected. Then the cat was out of the bag: Lerumo Kalako, a former National Assembly MP, is the convenor of the interim provincial committee. The Western Cape provincial executive committee was disbanded on the weekend of the 26-29 July by the National Executive Committee of the ANC, the party’s highest decision-making body. Previously, Kalako had been a member of Parliament’s portfolio committee on communications in the National Assembly during the fifth Parliament. He is presently a member of the ANC’S Dullah Omar (metro) region. Kalako and 29 other ANC officials make up the interim provincial committee, with Stellenbosch municipality councillor Ronalda Nalumango the party’s interim co-ordinator. Some other members of the committee include former Western Cape premiers Lynne Brown and Ebrahim Rasool, Cosatu Western Cape provincial secretary Malvern de Bruyn and Shaun Byneveldt, former speaker in the Western Cape legislature. Members of the provincial legislature Ayanda Bans, Rachel Windvogel, Cameron Dugmore and Andile Lili are also on the 30-strong committee. New national MPs Maurencia Gillion and Faiez Jacobs, who were at the centre of the controversial Iqbal Survé pre-election R1-million donation saga, which still lingers in the recent memory of the ANC, also feature. The interim committee will be operational for nine months until its provincial conference to elect fresh leadership. Kalako told the media: “First, we’ll convene in order to make sure we put together the subcommittees and draw up a programme of work.” Thereafter, the primary task would be to increase the number of branches and members in the province. Kalako said his team would provide support to the legislature caucus and at local government level. Magashule described the new leadership as “starting a new chapter of the ANC” focused on rebuilding and renewing, both at national and provincial levels. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.