Juventus said they had signed Brazilian Danilo on a five-year contract for 37 million euros ($41.5 million) while Manchester City confirmed the recruitment of Portugal international Cancelo. Juventus said the English champions would pay them 65 million euros for Cancelo. Cancelo, 25, spent one season at Juventus, helping them win an eighth successive Serie A title. Raised at Benfica, he has also played for Valencia and Inter Milan. “City are a fantastic club, with a brilliant manager and I am delighted to be here,” Cancelo said. “Everything about them has impressed me, from the facilities to their style of play,” he added. “I am always looking to develop my game and win trophies and I believe I can do that here.” Cancelo has played 14 times for Portugal although Nelson Semedo often gets the nod ahead of him for the right back position. Danilo, a member of Brazil’s World Cup squad last year, made 34 Premier League appearances in two seasons at Manchester City. Raised at America Mineiro, the 28-year-old has also played for Santos, Porto and Real Madrid. ($1 = 0.8925 euros) (Reporting by Brian Homewood, editing by Ed Osmond) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.