On Wednesday, the South African Police Service carried out its second raid in as many weeks. Several buildings and roads were shut down in the Johannesburg city centre as various police units moved into the area to look for counterfeit goods and illegal items, News24 reported. In a joint statement from the offices of the Minister of Police, Gauteng police commissioner and Gauteng premier, it emerged that a warrant officer and four constables were arrested at the Johannesburg Central police station after ” they were caught attempting to resell confiscated goods to the illegal traders” . The statement also indicated that, in a second incident, two Tactical Response Team members were arrested after police investigated a possible “leak of information” about the planned operation in the Johannesburg CBD. “The two were linked through investigation and an eyewitness account. Police believe the loot found in the 46 vehicles in the basement parking at Lister Building could be the cargo that was removed the night before after the illegal traders had received a tip-off,” the statement read. Briefing the media after the raids, Gauteng Premier David Makhura alluded to a “criminal syndicate” that “mobilised” and “sent out information” to those who attacked police during their ill-fated raid last week. Gauteng police commissioner Lieutenant General Elias Mawela commended the work of Crime Intelligence and the Anti-Corruption Unit, saying: “We certainly hope that the arrest of seven of our own will prove to the people of Gauteng that we are serious about eradicating crime, even if it means arresting our own. No one is above the law.” News24 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.