The warning puts the IMF at odds with Finance Minister Mthuli Ncube, who said in an interview he’s in favour of boosting wages in both the public and private sectors to restore living standards and create consumer demand. Ncube is looking for ways to revive an economy that’s forecast to contract this year for the first time in a decade. In the six years to 2016, Zimbabwe boosted pay for its about 400,000 civil servants to a level that makes up more than 90% of tax revenue, compared with 40% in 2010, said Patrick Imam, the IMF’s resident representative. “The government wage bill is now on a sustainable footing,” he said in response to questions. “Looking ahead, it is crucial that public wage growth be aligned with economic growth and government revenue.” Read more about Ncube’s economic recovery plans for Zimbabwe In February, the government said a quasi-currency known as bond notes, and RTGS$ in their electronic form, would no longer trade at parity with the U.S. dollar and in June it reintroduced the Zimbabwe dollar, which it had abolished in 2009 after a bout of hyperinflation. It also banned the use of the American currency. The exchange rate is now about 10 to the U.S. dollar and the price of goods bought by middle class workers, such as civil servants, has risen in tandem as these are mostly imported. Officially annual inflation is at 176%, but some analysts estimate it’s as high as 570%. The resulting economic hardship has spawned calls by the opposition for protests against plunging living standards. Police violently dispersed demonstrators in the capital, Harare, on Friday, while a second planned rally in the second-biggest city of Bulawayo on Monday was banned by the government. More protests are planned in other cities this week. Having fired 3,000 workers from the public service, there’s limited room for the state to cut jobs further. Both the IMF and the government say that more health workers and teachers will be needed in coming years. Ncube’s government has implemented harsh austerity measures, including regular hikes to fuel prices, in a bid to comply with an IMF Staff-Monitored Program seen as a precursor to getting debt relief that’s needed to restore the economy. It will also need to implement a series of political reforms to convince creditors to participate in any debt restructuring. The IMF program is due to end in March, with a first review scheduled for next month. “The Staff-Monitored Program is also intended to assist in resolving the long-standing arrears to external creditors and facilitate re-engagement with the international community,” Imam said. “Given the recent history of Zimbabwe, in particular the fact that the country has arrears to other international organizations, as well as bilateral arrears, the fund is not yet in a position to financially support the country.” Zimbabwe’s economy collapsed after a wave of seizures of white-owned commercial farms that began in 2000 slashed export income. In November 2017, Robert Mugabe, who had led the country since 1980, was ousted as president in a coup and replaced by Emmerson Mnangagwa. Ncube was appointed about a year ago and tasked with putting the economy back on a sound footing. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.