Thai employees check Huawei smartphones at a Huawei store in Bangkok, Thailand, 21 May 2019. EPA-EFE/RUNGROJ YONGRIT “My responsibilities are many, but none of them extends to the City’s tender specification process,” Mokgalapa said in a statement following the publication of the story. “That remains the domain of Supply Chain Management and the bid adjudication committee. An amount of R1b for a tender was also dismissed as “salacious”. “It comes at R26 million, not the R350 million over 3 years as reported in the publication. “It’s false that the sole provider with the capacity to render this expertise is Huawei. The alleged R1-billion does not exist.” He said it is true that Tshwane is an “embattled municipality”. “It’s no secret that I inherited an administration that was scandal-ridden by tender irregularities and administrative dilemmas. “The Auditor-General reports on this in granular detail. However, purporting to build a narrative around me with my hand in the cookie jar is salacious and a deliberate attempt to mislead the public.” The publication reported that Mokgalapa could be in hot water with his party for not getting the requested approvals from them for the trip. DA Federal Executive leader James Selfe told the publication he knew nothing about the issuing of the contract. He was aware Mokgalapa had gone to China at the company’s invitation, but the requested approvals had not been obtained before him leaving, Selfe said. Mokgalapa would have to explain, he said. Selfe reportedly said he would quiz Mokgalapa on the matter because mayors should not involve themselves in tender processes. Huawei told the Sunday Times it had no business dealings with the City of Tshwane and the purpose of the trip was to show off its IT innovations – something not uncommon in the sector. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.