 Van Rooyen, 29, who finished runner-up in Qatar and Morocco this season, stretched the lead to three strokes on the back nine at Hills Golf & Sports Club in Gothenburg. Fitzpatrick, the 2016 champion, stepped up the pressure with a birdie-birdie finish to sign for a six-under-par 64 and when Van Rooyen bogeyed the 17th hole, the players were tied at 18-under overall. But Van Rooyen made a gutsy birdie at the par-five 18th to take the victory and continue an impressive first year on the tour. The result moves him inside the top 10 on the Race to Dubai rankings. “It’s too good, it’s hard to describe,” he said. “I was so nervous on 18. On 17 I was fine, I just didn’t hit that putt hard enough and then I asked (caddie) Alex, ‘what are we at?’ and he told me that Matt went birdie-birdie. “I’ve been putting so well all day and to hole that one to win my first one is pretty cool.” Home favourite Henrik Stenson thrilled the fans with a hole-in-one at the sixth in a final round 66 that moved him up to third at 14-under alongside South African Dean Burmester, who carded the same score. (Reporting by Hardik Vyas in Bengaluru Editing by Ian Chadband) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.