David Miller of South Africa is on his haunches as Pakistan players celebrate another wicket during the Group Stage match of the ICC Cricket World Cup 2019 between Pakistan and South Africa at Lords on June 23, 2019 in London, England. (Photo by Mike Hewitt/Getty Images) Cape Town – Cricket South Africa (CSA) on Monday announced the squad plus the coaches and technical staff who will be travelling to India for the spin bowling camp at Bengaluru from August 17 to 23. Former Proteas Ashwell Prince and Paul Adams have been named as respective batting and spin consultants, with Vincent Barnes the High Performance Manager. Russell Domingo , the SA A coach, will also be present. It includes members of both the South Africa A and Proteas squads ahead of their respective tours to India.”We have identified Aiden Markram, Zubayr Hamza and Temba Bavuma as key Proteas batsmen to benefit from this project and we have also included some of our potential stars of the future such as Janneman Malan and Sinethemba Qeshile, who have already both played for the Proteas, as well as Matthew Breetzke,” said Cricket SA Thabang Moroe.”The batting group is completed by two of our most consistent runs scorers in franchise cricket in Pieter Malan and Edward Moore.“The bowling group is headed by the experience of Dane Piedt and includes highly promising talents, among them being Bjorn Fortuin, Tsepo Ndwandwa and Senuran Muthusamy.“It is a fact that most international cricket is played on the sub-continent these days and we have to look ahead not only to the tours on the immediate horizon but the next edition of the ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup in India in 2023,” concluded Moroe. SA spin camp in India: Spin bowlers: Dane Piedt,  Senuran Muthusamy, Bjorn Fortuin, Tsepo Ndwandwa, Thomas Kaber, Dyllan Matthews, Geroge Linde Coaches and technical staff: Russell Domingo – SA A coach Ashwell Prince – batting consultant Paul Adams – spin consultant S. Hadebe – physiotherapist DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.