 Suddenly, fears of a full-blown financial crisis in Argentina have again come rushing to the fore. In the wake of President Mauricio Macri’s stunning rout in primary elections over the weekend, investors dumped stocks, bonds and currency en masse in a selloff that left much of Wall Street wondering whether the crisis-prone country was headed for another default. The upset, widely seen as a preview of October’s presidential vote, threw open the doors to the possibility a more protectionist government will take power come December and unravel the hard-won gains Macri made to regain the trust of the international markets. Asian stocks looked set to follow their U.S. counterparts lower as political unrest in Hong Kong and Argentina added to trade concerns and fueled a rally in global bonds. The yen and gold climbed. Risk assets were pummeled and Treasury yields sank after authorities closed Hong Kong’s airport and a Chinese official said the city was at a “critical juncture.” Futures indicated markets will open lower in Tokyo when traders return from a holiday Monday, as well as in Sydney. The latest sell-off provided another reminder of the fragile mood across markets extending the rocky start to August. Huawei hired the law firm Sidley Austin to lobby on trade as the U.S. pressures allies to join it in blacklisting the Chinese telecom giant and the company finds itself increasingly mired in Donald Trump’s trade war with Beijing. The lobbying effort will focus on export controls, trade sanctions “and other national security-related topics,” according to a filing with the U.S. Senate. The disclosure comes after the company’s billionaire founder said he wants to create an “iron army” that can help it survive an American onslaught while protecting its lead in next-generation wireless. Saudi Aramco’s first earnings call was surprisingly uneventful. The company said it doesn’t intend to tap international debt markets again in 2019 ahead of its planned IPO. However, the company will look at green bonds, Eurobonds and Sharia-compliant bonds, should it decide in the future that more external funding is necessary. Few questions really sought to probe the first-half results of a 12% drop in profit or a stake purchase of Reliance Industries. This is what’s caught our eye over the last 24 hours. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.