More than 80 flights were scrapped at Heathrow Airport and at least another 10 at Gatwick, according to a spokeswoman. Some 200 other flights were delayed, with London City Airport also affected.  1 The carrier had to switch to back-up manual systems to keep the remaining flights operating, while offering customers refunds or the chance to rebook flights from Thursday, according to an emailed statement.  1 “We are working as quickly as possible to resolve a systems issue which has resulted in a number of cancellations and delays today,” BA said. “A number of flights continue to operate.” The airline urged passengers to check the status of their planned journey before traveling to the airport. Hey Logan, we are experiencing some systems problems this morning which are affecting check-in and flight departures. If you’re travelling today please check https://t.co/2Ty8CEO0Dq and manage my booking for the latest flight information and allow extra time at the airport. 1/2 — British Airways (@British_Airways) August 7, 2019
BA has already faced flight disruptions this summer from baggage issues, another system glitch, and the threat of a strike earlier this week by Heathrow Airport workers, which was called off at the last minute. The carrier is due to restart talks with pilots on Thursday in a last-ditch attempt to avoid a walkout that could come as soon as the end of this month. Read more: British Airways, Union Extend Talks to Avert Pilot Strike (1) The problem on Wednesday is also affecting the British Airways app, the airline said in a separate Tweet. British Airways
@British_Airways
Replying to
Thorsten Maue
@ThorstenMaue
Hey there, we are experiencing some systems problems this morning which is also affecting the BA app. We’re sorry for the inconvenience and suggest trying again later. Letty
Sent via Conversocial. View original tweet. To contact the reporters on this story:
Benjamin Katz in London at bkatz38@bloomberg.net;
Jihye Lee in Seoul at jlee2352@bloomberg.net To contact the editors responsible for this story:
Tara Patel at tpatel2@bloomberg.net
John Bowker In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.