Fourie gave details of the events leading up the establishment of the farm. She told the commission that, while she was attending an office party in June 2012, she was roped into the matter by the head of the provincial treasury, Humphrey Kgomongwe. It was he who asked Fourie to carry out an assessment on a payment, amounting to R30m, that was needed by the provincial Department of Agriculture in connection with the project. At the time, there was only R6m in the Provincial Revenue Fund. The payment, Fourie found out, was needed by the next day – a Saturday – which Fourie said was impossible. While Fourie was looking through the documents provided to her, she asked the CFO of the Department of Agriculture, Seipati Dlamini, to furnish her with the reasons as to why the payment needed to be made, but Dlamini refused to do so. From these documents, Fourie said, she realised there were some irregularities. “A sentence stated that Estina submitted a proposal on the 15 th May, 2012. From that, I then asked the CFO of the department of agriculture [Seipati Dlamini], that means there was not a tender process followed for the appointment, but the appointment was done based on the proposal that was submitted, which she confirmed,” Fourie said. Fourie added that she then indicated that the payment would result in irregular expenditure and, if the funds were not available, it would mean unauthorised expenditure. While the feasibility study was not provided at that point (and was only provided a few months later, in October), Fourie said the agreement and obligations of Estina were not clear – including timeframes, deliverables and what was expected. It was also indicated that Estina would contribute a “phase-in investment” of R228m, but there was no timeframe on this. “I said to her [Dlamini] that we have provided with the reasons why we can’t pay, we provided her with evidence that we do not have the R30m. So… she needs to indicate if the CEO, after he has been briefed, is prepared to pay R5m… Will they then be satisfied with it? Her response to me was, she wants R30m or nothing.” Fourie added that to pay a company R30m upfront, without any work being done or services rendered, would be “a huge amount for nothing”. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.