The launch from North Korea’s southeastern region of Tongchon in Kangwon Province comes a day after Liberation Day, a holiday marked by both Koreas to celebrate its independence from Japanese colonial rule 1910-1945. South Korea’s military is monitoring for possible further launches, the statement said. North Korea sharply criticized South Korean President Moon Jae-in’s speech marking the holiday, calling saying he made “reckless remarks” that “had nothing to do with Liberation Day,” according to a statement carried by its state media Korea Central News Agency. The government-linked Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of Korea said North Korea no longer has anything to say to South Korean authorities “nor have any idea to sit with them again.” Over the past several weeks North Korea has tested an increasingly sophisticated, hard-to-track missile system that could wipe out South Korean and Japanese cities — not to mention U.S. forces based in both countries. U.S. President Donald Trump brushed off the tests, saying relations would improve when U.S.-South Korea military exercises end later this month. Trump Says Kim Is Open to Talks After Korea War Games End To contact the reporter on this story:
Jihye Lee in Seoul at jlee2352@bloomberg.net To contact the editor responsible for this story:
Daniel Ten Kate at dtenkate@bloomberg.net In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.