 Television footage showed barbed wire barricades set up on the streets of Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian-administered Kashmir, where gun-toting security were guarding the streets. Some of the restrictions, including one that prohibits assembly of people, were eased at the weekend, according to local officials and some media reports, ahead of the Muslim festival of Eid. Internet and phone lines, remain cut off and prominent political leaders are under arrest. Authorities are putting up 300 public telephone booths for communication, the government said in a statement, while banks started reopening on Saturday, according to Shahid Choudhary, the administration’s head in Srinagar. Yes. More than 250 ATMs have been made functional in #Srinagar . Bank branches also open. Advance salary on Eid eve being credited today. https://t.co/wA86udZJBxpic.twitter.com/jMg8YqQ1LV — Shahid Choudhary (@listenshahid) August 10, 2019 Indian authorities imposed a lock down fearing massive protests after the administration led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi ended Kashmir’s seven decade-old autonomy in a surprise move last week. In one swoop, the government pushed through a legislation which made the region a centrally administered one and ended its ability to draft own laws except in the areas of communications, defense, finance and foreign affairs. Indian citizens living outside the state can now own land in Kashmir. Situation limping back to normal in Kashmir. Administration is doing it’s best to reach out to people. Heartening to see people behaving with maturity and cooperating with Police & government institutions. pic.twitter.com/0r2XNmbuRK — Imtiyaz Hussain (@hussain_imtiyaz) August 10, 2019 Modi while addressing nation on Thursday, said people will not face difficulties in celebrating Eid and the move will bring prosperity to the region. He hailed a “new era” in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, while his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan warned of “genocide” once the curfew is lifted. On Sunday, Amit Shah, India’s home minister said the move will bring an “end to terrorism” in the state. Kashmir has been the main flash point between India and Pakistan since the British left the subcontinent in 1947. Both countries claim Kashmir as theirs and have fought two of their three wars over the territory. The situation remains tense in the restive region with footage from the BBC and Al Jazeera showing protesters marching on the streets against the move and clashing with security forces. Read: Why India and Pakistan Keep On Clashing: Responding to the development, Pakistan announced a series of measures to oppose what it called “unilateral and illegal actions” by India. Islamabad downgraded diplomatic relations and suspended bilateral trade with India and said it will take the matter to the United Nations Security Council and ensure the army remains vigilant. India urged Pakistan to review these. At the weekend, Pakistan imposed altitude restrictions on foreign aircraft flying over Lahore. The relations between the two South Asian rivals are already under strain following the February airstrikes by India and Pakistan’s retaliation on shooting down an Indian jet. India’s initial airstrikes were in response to a suicide bombing in Kashmir that killed 40 paramilitary troops. India accuses Pakistan of supporting armed extremists in Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan denies the charges and says it offers only moral support to separatists. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.