U.S. President Donald Trump took a step back in his trade war with Beijing, bowing to pressure from U.S. businesses concerned over the economic fallout of the ongoing spat with China. The U.S. said it would delay until mid-December a 10% tariff on a variety of Chinese consumer products such as cell phones, laptops, video games and children’s toys, leavening the impact on holiday-shopping consumers. However, other goods, including agricultural products, antiques, clothes, kitchenware and footwear, will remain on the list to be hit on Sept. 1. The announcement came as Vice Premier Liu He talked with U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin by phone. They’re planning more calls in two weeks. But don’t look for the tariff delay to fix the trade war problem just yet.  1 Air travel to and from Hong Kong was disrupted again Tuesday, after hundreds of black-shirted protesters returned to the airport, sparking clashes with riot police. In the glare of the massed media, demonstrators beat up a man they claimed was an undercover mainland China police officer and a reporter from the Chinese state media newspaper Global Times. The Airport Authority cancelled all evening departures and obtained a court injunction against the demonstrators, who had largely dispersed by Wednesday morning. In a tweet, President Trump said China’s forces were massing near the border with the city, and the U.S. administration urged Beijing to respect local rights. This is Xi Jinping’s dilemma: send in the troops now or wait out the protests? Asian stocks were primed to rally after the Trump administration de-escalated its trade war with China, providing relief to risk assets that had been under pressure earlier in the week. Treasuries retreated. Japanese futures were more than 2% higher after the S&P 500 saw its biggest intraday gain in more than two months. Elsewhere, oil jumped the most since early January as the trade deadlock between the world’s biggest economies showed signs of easing. The fallout from Argentina’s election continues. The nation’s bonds are now the second-riskiest sovereign debt in the world—behind only crisis-torn Venezuela. Morgan Stanley warned that the peso, down 18% in two days, may have quite a bit more to go as traders clean out positions and inflation expectations deteriorate. The dramatic decline has wreaked havoc on some of the largest U.S. money managers but has been a boon for bitcoin, which is up about 50% against the Argentine peso in the last week alone. Another bright spot: The Merval stock index clawed back some of its 40% loss from Monday. CBS and Viacom finally announced a tie-up after round-the-clock negotiations since the weekend, capping years of failed merger attempts and board infighting. The $11.7 billion all-stock deal unites the most-watched U.S. broadcast network with the owner of the Paramount movie studio and cable channels including MTV and Nickelodeon. Shari Redstone, whose family investment vehicle controls both companies, will be its chair. Finally, she has an empire of her own. This is what’s caught our eye over the last 24 hours. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.