When we are deprived of these small miracles, our lives are less fulfilling and can often lead to a feeling of being isolated from the world around you. We all love spending time with our family, going to our favourite restaurant and spending time with friends. However, we often struggle to catch all the words in these noisy environments, especially when there is background music or many people speaking together – like at a family gathering. Understanding speech in noise is the one problem all people with even a slight hearing loss struggle with. Getting help as soon as possible is critically important. Research shows that the longer you wait the more difficult it is to adapt to sound again with a detrimental effect on your mental health and even physical balance in the long-term. The term ‘use it or lose it’ is just as applicable to one’s hearing. In addition to hearing loss, tinnitus is often a problem many people have. This ‘ringing sound’ in the ears is present when no other noise is happening and can be extremely irritating. Tinnitus that is “new” to the person can often be improved by taking a good antioxidant like Hearing Health (available from the Ear Institute and selected audiologists) and ‘old’ or prolonged sufferers from tinnitus can often greatly benefit by being fitted with good quality hearing aids. The slight amplification of background noise often mask tinnitus and can last up to three hours after wearers remove their hearing aids when going to bed. One company that has been helping thousands of people to hear better since 1975 is the Ear Institute. This family-owned and managed world-class organisation has 22 Ear Institutes throughout SA and Namibia. At the Ear Institute, early detection is very important. The earlier one can get a comprehensive diagnosis of your hearing, the better the overall results will be. Regardless of the person’s age, the Ear Institute is the best place to go for a hearing test. All Ear Institutes have state-of-the-art technology and offer outstanding service – in fact, they guarantee your hearing will improve or they will gladly refund your money. Why don’t you phone the Ear Institute today for a hearing test and enjoy life to the full again. Call our hearing helpline at 0861-10-20-30 or visit www.earinstitute.co.za for more information. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.