News24 previously reported that Malema had said that “education must be free of charge so a girl child can be educated and become a confident judge tomorrow, so we get rid of incompetent judges who are threatened by politicians that appear before them”.  56 He also said the current stock of judges were “traumatised old people”.  50 “We want women judges that are not scared of male politicians and that are not threatened by male white Afrikaner lawyers before them. We want the judges that are going to say the judiciary must be independent and not be influenced by who is the president.  53 “If judges judge according to who appears before them, they must know we will be left with no options but to take up arms, because there is no neutrality in SA. The judges can save democracy of SA by not being biased. A biased judiciary will force us into the bush, and we don’t want to go into the bush,” he said.  61 Malema’s comments followed just days after two judgments were handed down by women judges in matters where the EFF was an unsuccessful party, the GCB said.  53 ‘Veiled attack of a personal nature’  18 The GCB said it respected the right to freedom of expression, including the right to criticise judicial decisions where justified.  1 “However, the judiciary is one of the cornerstones of our democracy. Its dignity and independence are to be respected and will be defended by the GCB when it comes under unwarranted attack,” GCB chairperson Craig-Watt Pringle SC said in a statement.  141 “The GCB does not seek by means of this statement to debate the correctness or otherwise of the two judgments referred to above, or to attempt to stifle debate in that regard.  1 “We do, however, wish to express our concern that, instead of offering a reasoned critique of the judgments, Mr Malema launched a veiled attack of a personal nature on the individual judges who delivered those judgments, by implication referring to them as being incompetent, lacking in appropriate confidence, independence, and being politically motivated.”  69 The GCB said it was unfortunate that Malema’s inappropriate criticisms – which were directed not at the correctness of the judgments, but at the perceived personal characteristics of the judges who delivered them – evidently sought to instil fear in the judiciary by making unfounded allegations of favour and prejudice.  147 “Attacks of this nature undermine the independence of the judiciary, which is not only the very value that Mr Malema purports to rely upon, but one from which he and the Economic Freedom Fighters have themselves benefitted on a number of occasions over the years.”  91 News24 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.