Archive Photo: Lukhan Salakaia-Loto (R) of the Wallabies and Scott Barrett (L) of the All Blacks contest a line out during the Bledisloe Cup rugby union match between the Wallabies of Australia and the All Blacks of New Zealand at Optus Stadium in Perth, Australia, 10 August 2019. EPA-EFE/RICHARD WAINWRIGHT AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND OUT First published by Extratime.media Scott Barrett’s red card against Australia during the 2019 Rugby Championship caused a right old kerfuffle. Well, in New Zealand anyway. It seemed as if everyone except for New Zealanders agreed that the decision was correct. But we’re not here to discuss that – you can find those debates over on Twitter. Far more interesting is the frequency – or rather the infrequency – of red cards in rugby. And equally, whether some teams are more regular offenders (or victims if you want to take the Kiwi line) than others. Before Barrett went bad, the last player from a top-tier nation to receive a red card was Ross Moriarty from Wales in 2018. France are by far the worst offenders, closely followed by Italy. Most red cards by country Note: Not all countries who have received red cards are included here – but these are the most prominent.  Prior to Barrett’s misdemeanour, New Zealand last received a red card in 2017, when Sonny Bill Williams was given his marching orders against the British and Irish Lions in Wellington for a shoulder charge on Anthony Watson’s head. There was little disagreement then about the merits of the red card on that occasion – even from the Kiwis. Much of the hubbub around rugby’s red cards centres around how the laws aren’t open for interpretation. It’s something All Blacks coach Steve Hansen pointed out before, too. When France full-back Benjamin Fall was sent off in 2018 for a collision with another Barrett (Beauden), the All Blacks coach came to his defence. Back then, Hansen suggested that union adopts an approach similar to (rugby) league. “It’s disappointing they lost a player,” Hansen said after the match. “I know it’s tough and they have to look after players, but somehow I think that we need to look at something where that can go on the report.” While there might be some merit in that, red cards in international rugby remain fairly rare. At the time of writing (10 August 2019), just 177 red cards had been issued. Some teams have crossed the line more than others, but as illustrated by the line graph below, there hasn’t suddenly been a surge in boytjies behaving badly. Most red cards in a year  In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.