The verdict, reported by Los Angeles City News Service, followed a copyright trial in which Marcus Gray, known as Flame, said the beat in his song “Joyful Noise” was lifted and used in Perry’s single. The jury last week ruled that the short passage in the two songs was identical. Perry, who was not in federal court for the damages decision, testified last month that she believed “Dark Horse” was an original work. The song was created by her producers and writers after she was presented with a series of short instrumental passages, the pop star testified. Her attorney said she would appeal. “The writers of `Dark Horse’ consider this a travesty of justice,” attorney Christine Lepera told reporters outside the court, City News reported. “Dark Horse” brought in about $31 million for record label Capitol Records, a unit of Universal Music Group, attorneys for both sides agreed during the trial. Perry earned about $3.2 million. On Thursday, Capitol Records was ordered to pay $1.2 million in damages to Gray, while Perry was ordered to pay $550,000. Producers and other collaborators on the song were told to pay the balance of the $2.7 million award. Flame, 37, from St. Louis, Missouri, released his first album in 2004 and has had several hits on the Billboard gospel and Christian charts, but is little known outside of that genre. Perry, 34, rose to fame in 2008 with the single “I Kissed a Girl” and went on to become one of the best-selling female pop stars in the world. She was also a judge for three seasons of the TV talent show “American Idol.” (Reporting by Jill Serjeant Editing by Leslie Adler) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.