All three major U.S. indexes closed down about 3%, with the blue-chip Dow posting its biggest one-day point drop since October after 2-year Treasury yields surpassed those of 10-year bonds, which is considered a classic recession signal. Germany reported a contraction in the second-quarter gross domestic product, and China’s industrial growth in July hit a 17-year low. “It was all negative and not much positive today,” said Chuck Carlson, chief executive officer at Horizon Investment Services in Hammond, Indiana. “We’re outside of the earnings season and markets are being batted around by news.” “It’s a reactionary market right now and probably will continue to be,” Carlson added. “My guess is we’re probably in for this until after Labor Day.” Wednesday was the first time that yields for 2-year and 10-year Treasuries had inverted since June 2007, months before the onset of the great recession, which crippled markets for years. The U.S. yield curve has inverted before every recession in the past 50 years. A trader works on the floor at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in New York, U.S., August 14, 2019. REUTERS/Eduardo Munoz “It could be different this time,” Carlson said. “When you’ve got $15 trillion in global government debt at negative yields, that’s a new animal. “Even if it is accurate in foreshadowing a recession, that doesn’t mean it’s coming tomorrow,” he added. The CBOE volatility index, a gauge of investor anxiety, jumped 4.58 points to 22.10. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 800.49 points, or 3.05%, to 25,479.42, the S&P 500 lost 85.72 points, or 2.93%, to 2,840.6, and the Nasdaq Composite dropped 242.42 points, or 3.02%, to 7,773.94. Over 300 of the S&P 500’s components are down 10% or more from their 52-week highs, according to Refinitiv data. More than 180 of those stocks have fallen more than 20% from their 52-week highs, putting them in the bear market territory. All of the 11 major sectors in the S&P 500 closed in negative territory, with energy, financials, materials, consumer discretionary and communications services all falling 3% or more. Interest rate-sensitive banks tumbled 4.3%. Macy’s Inc’s shares plunged 13.2% after the department store operator missed quarterly profit estimates and cut its full-year earnings estimates. Rival department store operators Nordstrom Inc and Kohls Corp slid 10.6% and 11.0%, respectively. A U.S. House of Representatives oversight panel called on Mylan NV and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd to turn over documents as part of a review into generic drug price increases. Facebook Inc slid 4.6% on news that the European Union’s lead regulator is investigating how the social media company handled data during the manual transcription of users’ audio recordings. Declining issues outnumbered advancing ones on the NYSE by a 4.44-to-1 ratio; on Nasdaq, a 5.33-to-1 ratio favoured decliners. The S&P 500 posted eight new 52-week highs and 51 new lows; the Nasdaq Composite recorded 23 new highs and 282 new lows. Volume on U.S. exchanges was 8.68 billion shares, compared with the 7.47 billion average over the last 20 trading days. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.