Denny Nkuna started a business queueing for people in Burgersdorp, Limpopo, for a minimum of R50. Photo supplied First published by GroundUp Standing in snaking queues – whether at Home Affairs, collecting a social grant, or a visit to a congested clinic – is a boring and time-consuming task many South Africans find themselves doing more often than they like. After hearing numerous complaints by peers and gogos in his community, 29-year-old Koketso Denny Nkuna from Burgersfort in Limpopo, had the idea to queue for people for a fee. Nkuna said he had been unemployed for nearly eight years and had grown despondent about ever finding a job. Burgersfort, which falls under the Sekhukhune District municipality, is home to more than 20 mines, but towns there, including Burgersfort, are among the most impoverished places in the country. Nkuna, who studied engineering, said he needed a way to support his girlfriend and their baby. “I had a bad experience with job hunting and the recent retrenchment of workers in my area led me to start this business,” he said. “I identified that queues are a big problem throughout the country. So I decided to give it a try and maybe provide an income for other young South African men,” he said. Nkuna currently employs five people. On the job they wear bright orange bibs with “I queue 4 You” on either side, along with their contact number. They charge R50 per client, but this fee increases to R100 for every additional hour they spend in line, Nkuna explained. “We have already had people coming up and asking us what we do. My clients phone me to tell us where they want us to wait in the queue for them. My clients are all ages, not just the gogos,” he said. Nkuna hopes to grow his business to areas outside of Burgersfort and is currently looking to partner with potential investors. “It would be great if someone could help us design an App like Uber where our clients can book us and we can plan where we need to be queueing. We are looking for the business to grow and spread to other places in the country,” he said. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.