DA federal council deputy chairperson Natasha Mazzone said the DA federal executive issued an instruction that Sylvester be put on special leave. Asked for details of the allegations against him, Mazzone said “to ensure fairness, I cannot comment on the reasons for the investigation as this would prejudice both Mayor Sylvester and the investigation”. IOL reported Sylvester as saying: “The party has yet to provide me with terms of reference, so I am unclear as to what the allegations are against me.” He found it ironic that the leadership would take such strong action against him when no action was taken against other representatives, including the council speaker and municipal manager. “Neither has any action been taken against the municipal manager, Allen Paulse, to whom I have brought evidence of financial irregularities to the office of the MEC for Local Government. It seems the party protects certain members and selectively takes strict action against those members they deem are deserving,” IOL quoted him as saying. Service delivery Further attempts to obtain comment from Sylvester were unsuccessful. But Mazzone responded: “There is certainly not selective persecution of certain party members. It’s exactly for that reason that I spoke to the entire caucus, with the mayor present, to explain the situation and how long the investigation would take. The caucus meeting is, of‌ ‌course, confidential, but it was very amicable.” She added that no service delivery would be affected and no one would replace Sylvester for the six-week period. “The DA’s federal legal commission operates according to very strict rules that ensure fairness for all parties.” Sylvester is not the first councillor in Oudtshoorn to face a disciplinary or investigative process. Earlier this year, Sylvester told News24 that the Oudtshoorn municipal council had served the Paulse with a letter of intent to suspend. This followed the council’s in-committee sitting on Friday, June 28, where it was resolved to put Paulse on precautionary suspension as provided for in section 6 of the disciplinary code. In a statement at the time, the ANC said the mayor “has resorted to unjust and unfair labour practices to get rid of their own municipal manager”. The ANC argued that the decision to put Paulse on precautionary suspension was not procedural. The statement continued: “The ANC chief whip requested that the mayor amends his recommendation to first allow the municipal manager an opportunity to make written representations in response to the allegations, before placing him on precautionary suspension.” News24 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.