This after police conducted a raid on shops in Jeppe Street which were allegedly selling fake goods. However, police say the owners retaliated, preventing them from confiscating the goods. The owners then chased police officials down the street, throwing stones at them.  2 In videos going viral on social media, the crowd can be seen shouting and throwing stones at a police Nyala which is seen trying to drive away from the scene.  3 Johannesburg Central Police Station spokeperson Xoli Mbele said among the goods sold in the shop were “fake” versions of sportswear brands such as Nike, Puma and Adidas. Mbele said rubber bullets had to be used by to disperse the crowd. No one was injured and no arrests had been made, he added. Gauteng MEC for Community Safety, MEC Faith Mazibuko has since condemn the attacks on the police and members of other law enforcement agencies, saying the rule of law was being undermined.  2 “We condemn all criminal elements hellbent on undermining the rule of the law in this country and making this country ungovernable. We can’t co-govern with criminals, especially foreign nationals who want to turn our country into a lawless Banana Republic.”  8 She said her department would return to the area alongside SAPS, the Johannesburg Metro Police, Home Affairs and SARS Customs officials, in a joint operation.  4 “We will assert our authority and show ungovernable foreign nationals that there are laws in South Africa and they must be respected. We will also liaise with the Minister of [Department of International Relations and Cooperation] DIRCO to engage embassies to encourage their citizens to respect the laws of this country.”  4 Gauteng police spokesperson Brigadier Mathapelo Peters said law enforcement agencies had opted to tactically withdraw from the intelligence-driven operation targeting counterfeit goods in the after the violent crowd attacked police with objects including bricks and petrol bombs.  5 “Due to the volatility of the situation, police retreated to avoid a situation where they would be forced to use live ammunition. Of priority at this point was ensuring that there was no bloodshed or death.”  7 She said although no law enforcement members had sustained injuries, two of the brand owners who had accompanied the officers on the operation as well as one paramedic had sustained serious injuries. Peters said the situation was now calm and that police were closely monitoring the area to make sure no further violence erupt.  1 Gauteng Provincial Commissioner Lieutenant General Elias Mawela said: “Such lawlessness cannot be allowed to go unpunished”.  6 News24 In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.