By Rachel Savage The party, Noam, was denied space on the outside wall of a Jerusalem hotel and on bus sides for posters that read “‘Pride’ and the buying of children or my son will marry a woman – Israel chooses to be normal”. It petitioned a parliamentary body chaired by Israeli Supreme Court justice Neal Hendel, who ruled that under election law, companies must sell advertising space to any party that wants it or none at all. “A duty of equality (includes) the commitment to publish election propaganda of all parties and lists, including those whose values ​​are different… from those of the advertising agency,” Hendel said in his judgement on Tuesday. Israel is one of a handful of Middle Eastern countries – along with Jordan and Bahrain – that allow same-sex relations, in a region where several states impose the death penalty. Gay marriage is illegal in the country of 9 million, although weddings performed abroad are recognised. Noam, a recently-formed, ultra-Orthodox Jewish party, did not respond to a request for comment, though it called the ruling “a great victory” on Facebook. Polls indicate the party is unlikely to get above the vote threshold required to get seats in parliament in legislative elections being held on Sept. 17. Gay rights campaigners said such advertising had no place in a democratic election campaign. “When children like our children – 5, 6, 8 year-old children – see this kind of hate advertising they ask us, ‘Dad, do you think that I am normal?” said Julien Bahoul, spokesman for the Association of Gay Israeli Fathers. Such advertising has “nothing to do with freedom of speech,” said Or Keshet, who lobbies Israeli politicians on behalf of a coalition of 14 Israeli LGBT+ groups. “They hate and they mock and they insult anyone who is different than them,” he said. The two advertising companies involved in the case, Cnaan Media and Y. Moore, did not respond to requests for comment. (Reporting by Rachel Savage @rachelmsavage; Editing by Claire Cozens. Please credit the Thomson Reuters Foundation, the charitable arm of Thomson Reuters, that covers humanitarian news, women’s and LGBT+ rights, human trafficking, property rights, and climate change. Visit http://news.trust.org) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.