 The fines included five charges of unsportsmanlike conduct totalling $85,000, $20,000 for verbal abuse, $5,000 for audible obscenity and $3,000 for leaving the court. “In addition to the on-site fines, the ATP is looking further into what happened during and immediately after the match to see if additional action is warranted,” the governing body said in a statement. “That could result in an additional fine and/or suspension.” Kyrgios clashed with umpire Fergus Murphy in the second set of the night match against Russian Karen Khachanov. Kyrgios accused Murphy of starting the shot clock too early and was ultimately issued a point penalty at the end of the second set tiebreak for insulting the Irish umpire using an expletive. The 24-year-old then left the court for what he deemed a bathroom break, despite protests from Murphy, and television pictures showed him smashing his rackets in a tunnel. Kyrgios left the court without shaking Murphy’s hand. He had clashed with the Irish official two weeks ago at the Washington Open and was also fined by the ATP after being embroiled in an expletive-ridden rant with Murphy at the Queen’s Club Wimbledon warm-up tournament in June. (Reporting by Rory Carroll, editing by Pritha Sarkar) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.