Only 150 of the “Ed Sheeran X Heinz Tomato Ketchup, the Tattoo Edition” bottles, featuring a copy of Sheeran’s own Heinz inking, will be available across the world. The first three were sold for 1,050 pounds, 1,100 pounds and 1,500 pounds on Thursday. Nigel Dickie, Kraft Heinz director of corporate affairs, said 150 of the bottles were made to mark Heinz 150th birthday. “What’s special about them is that they have his tattoos on the label,” he said. “They’re part of the label, so it’s his sleeve on our sleeve.” He said he suspected not many people would open the bottles, but they had “perfectly enjoyable ketchup” inside. Some 104 bottles will be the prizes in a free global draw, according to a statement linked on Sheeran’s Instagram account, and the remainder would go to Sheeran and Heinz superfans and museums. All money raised from the bottles will be donated to East Anglia’s Children’s Hospices, a charity nominated by Sheeran, and Rise Against Hunger, which is supported by Heinz. The 28-year-old star, who has sold more than 150 million records worldwide, is a long-time fan of the sauce and has the “Heinz Tomato Ketchup” label tattooed on his arm. Earlier this year he teamed up with the brand to release “Tomato Edchup” and wrote and starred in a TV advert for the release. ($1 = 0.8260 pounds) (Reporting by Marissa Davison, Writing by Paul Sandle; Editing by Toby Chopra) In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.