 Markets have been whipsawed amid concern over economic weakness, the path of interest rates and U.S.-China trade tension. Fed Chairman Jerome Powell could provide more guidance on policy when he speaks Friday at the annual Jackson Hole symposium. Investors have priced in a quarter-percentage-point rate cut next month, but dissenting Fed voices may limit the prospects for the larger movement that some have advocated, including President Donald Trump. “The big question mark is just going to be Jackson Hole — what’s Powell going to say?” said Chris Zaccarelli, chief investment officer for Independent Advisor Alliance. “You’re seeing the market going higher and lower this week heading into tomorrow, where we could get some market-moving commentary out of Powell’s speech.” Elsewhere, most euro-area government bonds fell as the European Central Bank expressed concern that investors were losing faith in its ability to revive inflation and after a measure of German manufacturers reinforced recession concern. The British pound jumped as investors seized on hints from European leaders that a Brexit deal could still be reached. Here are some notable events coming up: Here are some of the main moves in markets:  In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.