The Western Cape ANC has endured a rocky two years, with the party’s top brass having to be called in on two occasions to resolve public infighting that played out ahead of the party’s 2017 Nasrec conference. The ANC’s NEC meeting held this past weekend in Tshwane resolved to disband the provincial executive committee, whose mandate had expired in any case, but was still operating due to the province’s failure to hold a provincial conference. “The NEC expressed concern on the functioning of the Provincial Executive Committee in the Western Cape, whose growing internal disintegration played itself out in the public, making it difficult for the PEC to discharge its duties,” ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe said on Friday. “The ANC will send its Western Cape NEC deployees to the province to engage with our structures as part of organisational building and renewal.” Youth League The announcement comes days after the party said the ANC Youth League leadership was also disbanded. The faction of the ANC Youth League that successfully campaigned for the league’s disbandment though, rejected the party’s choice to bring in a “national task team”, as it preferred a restructuring of the youth league. A provincial interim committee meanwhile will be established in the Western Cape accordance with the ANC constitution, Mabe said. “The immediate task of the Provincial Interim Committee is to implement the process of renewal and rebuilding in the province and to prepare the province towards an elective provincial conference. “The ANC efforts to reclaim the Western Cape remain firmly on course,” Mabe added. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.