Gauteng premier David Makhura during an interview at his office on December 01, 2018 in Johannesburg, South Africa. (Photo by Gallo Images / City Press / Leon Sadiki) In what seemed a frank warning, Gauteng ANC chairperson, David Makhura, said the party will be taking issues of corruption and maladministration in local government to task. Speaking at the caucus’s local government summit on Monday 26 August in Boksburg, Johannesburg, Makhura said: “Where the ANC is in charge, we can’t tolerate corruption, we can’t tolerate mismanagement. “We would like to see all the municipalities governed by the ANC working with a greater sense of urgency. Not just Thuma mina but also Khawuleza (hurry). But if we are not united, there is no way we will be able to live up to the expectations of delivery and development – we will divide South Africa,” he told delegates to the summit. The summit is aimed at addressing challenges confronting municipalities in the province. Issues such as municipal finance viability and sustainability; improving the capacity of municipalities to provide basic services, and mechanisms to improve governance and accountability were listed for discussion on the summit’s programme. Those discussions were, however, closed to the media. The ANC factional battles that have played out recently are not only indicative of a party that is at war with itself, but also threaten good governance. The Auditor-General’s consolidated report on national and provincial audit outcomes pointed out that only 12 out of the 23 auditees received clean audits in Gauteng. Last week, the MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA), Lebogang Maile, announced that his department is setting up a committee to investigate and act on allegations of fraud, corruption and maladministration in the province’s municipalities. Furthermore, Maile cited nine of the 11 municipalities in the province as running a risk of being placed under administration. The MEC listed the City of Johannesburg and Tshwane, both DA-run metros, as experiencing the most irregular, unauthorised and wasteful expenditure. On Monday Makhura said that those who are found to be corrupt, fraudulent and performing poorly should face some sort of punishment. “The ANC has to be very firm. Corruption, mismanagement and poor performance must lead to consequence[s]. Even if it’s an ANC-led municipality… “We are going to crack the whip on all municipalities. The are DA mayors who are politicising the matter, saying ‘it’s because he wants to deal with us. MEC of CoGTA is cracking the whip in all municipalities where there is something wrong,” Makhura stated. Makhura said corruption and maladministration were not the only challenges facing municipalities. The unwillingness to co-operate in municipalities not run by the ANC was also a threat, listing the City of Johannesburg’s apparent refusal to cooperate with provincial government as an example. “Working with the City of Johannesburg leadership is difficult. They don’t want to co-operate. When it comes to issues of government, party-politics must move aside. That is what our constitution says,” said Makhura. DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.