Young protesters have been targeting South African businesses in Nigeria over what they call xenophobic attacks on their compatriots in South Africa. (Photo: EPA / Kim Ludbrook) Young people in Nigeria have been protesting and shutting down South African businesses to highlight their anger at “continuous xenophobic attacks on Nigerian residents in South Africa”. The protests were organised by the National Association of Nigerian Students (NANS). On Saturday, 10 August, NANS shut down Shoprite in Ogun state. In July, MTN offices in Kaduna were shut down. The businesses were targeted because they are South African owned. “It seems the government of South Africa derives pleasure from the senseless killings and sees the continuous xenophobic attacks on Nigerian residents in South Africa as a norm,” Azeez Adeyemi, the national public relations officer of NANS, told reporters on Saturday. The protests come after Elizabeth Ndubuisi-Chukwu, the deputy director-general of Chartered Insurance Institute of Nigeria, died at the Emperors Palace Hotel and Convention Centre in Kempton Park, Johannesburg on 13 June. An autopsy revealed she had been strangled. At a media briefing on Sunday, 11 August in Pretoria, Naledi Pandor, the minister of international relations and cooperation, said her department was concerned “regarding statements said to emanate from a student organisation in Nigeria, calling for the expulsion of South Africans and protests at South African owned businesses”. “The protests are said to be in response to the alleged killings of Nigerians by South Africans. As you are aware, these allegations are devoid of truth, reckless and unwarranted.” Pandor said the South African Police Service were investigating the death of Ndubuisi-Chukwu and that nobody “should abuse this unfortunate tragedy to generate negative sentiments about South Africa”. A protest over Ndubuisi-Chukwu’s death was also held outside the South African consulate in Nigeria on 15 July. “We don’t know what actually happened. If we don’t have a full investigation and prosecution, the killing will continue because there is no deterrent to any of the criminals. This thing happened in a hotel room, that is all we know,” said the president of Nigerian Union, South Africa, Adetola Olubajo in a radio interview with Channel Africa on 17 July 2019. In the same month, the acting high commissioner to Nigeria, Bobby Moroe, told Nigeria’s Senate that “an inquest docket had been instituted. We want to assure the Nigerian government of the full cooperation of the South African government.” “We know that most refugees that come to the country are undocumented, whether they are documented or not, is not a reason for them to be killed,” said Victor Chikalogwe, director of PASSOP, an organisation that lobbies for the rights of asylum seekers, refugees and immigrants. “Anyone staying in a hotel or an Airbnb should feel safe. If someone dies then there needs to be a proper investigation of what happened.” DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.