Prices of basic goods and services have more than doubled since June, when the government renamed the RTGS currency as the Zimbabwe dollar , which has been sliding in value amid widespread shortages, including power, fuel and US dollars. That has stirred memories among an increasingly impoverished population of economic chaos a decade ago when rampant money-printing led to hyperinflation and forced the country to abandon its currency. In a statement published on Sunday, the Zimbabwe Energy Regulatory Authority said petrol would now cost 9.01 Zimbabwe dollars ($0.025) up from 7.55 ($0.021). Diesel would cost 9.06 ($0.025) Zimbabwe dollars, a 26 percent increase.  1 Fuel prices have been increased four times since June and by more than 500 percent this year, as the value of the local currency has slid.  3 But fuel shortages remain, with motorists spending hours lining up at the pumps. Demand for fuel has also gone up as businesses use diesel generators due to 18-hour electricity cuts. The government is trying to end subsidies by raising the price of fuel and electricity tariffs and putting its finances on a strong footing, but that has unleashed inflation, eroding salaries and angering unions. In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.