The 74-page dossier by Brenton Tarrant, which has been described by Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison as a “work of hate”, praised Trump as “a symbol of renewed white identity and common purpose”.  4 The 28-year-old, who is now in police custody, also claimed that he had “brief contact” with Breivik and had received a “blessing” for his actions from the mass murderer’s acquaintances.  3 The dossier stated objections to immigration and multiculturalism, and decries the “decaying” culture of the white, European western world.  1 Earlier on Friday, at least 49 people were killed and 20 others seriously wounded in shootings at two mosques in the New Zealand city of Christchurch, in the worst attack in the Pacific country’s history. The majority of the victims were gunned down at the Al Noor Mosque, while the rest were shot dead at another mosque in suburban Linwood.  2 The Muslim worshippers had congregated for Friday prayers, Islam’s holy day of the week. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has described the shootings as a “well-planned terrorist attack”, and said this is one of the country’s “darkest days”.  1 In addition to Tarrant, three other suspects, including a woman, have been arrested, New Zealand Police Commissioner Mike Bush said.
DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.