Cases against six people charged with fraud and corruption regarding tenders awarded to Bosasa were postponed on Wednesday in the Specialised Commercial Crimes Court pending the outcome of a liquidation case against African Global Group, formerly Bosasa.  1 Bosasa COO Angelo Agrizzi, CFO Andries Van Tonder, former correctional services director general Linda Mti and former correctional services CFO Patrick Gillingham are all facing charges related to misappropriating R1.6-billion from tenders related to the prison system.  1 The case was postponed to 5 July after prosecutor Advocate Tebogo Serunye said he wants companies African Global Group, Sondolo IT and Phezulu Fencing added to the charge sheet.  1 African Global Group successfully overturned its own liquidation application in the Johannesburg High Court recently, claiming it entered into liquidation in an error of judgement. Liquidator Cloete Murray believes the process should continue and is appealing the judgment in the Supreme Court of Appeal. The postponement is meant to allow for the finalisation of the case so that the companies can be added to the charge sheet. Bosasa employees Frans Vorster and Carlos Bonifacio appeared in another court on Wednesday and while the case against them was said to be ready to prosecute, it was also postponed until 5 July. Bosasa auditor Peet Venter had been testifying at the State Capture Inquiry on Tuesday and Wednesday and Agrizzi is expected to return to testify this week following the explosive allegations of bribery he implicated himself in during his previous testimony. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.