Temer, 78, became the second former Brazilian head of state after Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva to be arrested by the so-called Carwash probe that has brought down swathes of the nation’s business and political elite. Former Energy Minister Wellington Moreira Franco, a close friend of Temer, was also detained. They are both members of the MDB, one of the larger parties in Brazil’s highly fractured Congress. Brazilian markets sank as news of Temer’s arrest sent shock waves across Brasilia, where lawmakers have begun analyzing the government’s pension reform bill; an unpopular piece of legislation deemed vital to shore up Brazil’s battered public finances. While the medium and long-term consequences remain unclear, in the short-term the arrests create another major distraction from the increasingly urgent task of rescuing Brazil’s anemic recovery. Footage of Temer’s detention and journey to jail dominated local media all day. “It’s undeniable that Temer’s arrest clouds the outlook in Brasilia,” analysts from XP Politica wrote in a research note. “The focus on pension reform is lost, even if for only a few days.” Lower house speaker Rodrigo Maia, Moreira Franco’s son-in-law and a keen advocate for reform, said that the arrests would not affect the bill’s passage, but he acknowledged there were “other problems”. Concerns about the government’s ability to approve the bill were already on the rise after a separate proposal for military pensions displeased investors and government allies on Wednesday. The leader of the opposition in the Chamber of Deputies, Alessandro Molon, said that the arrests “create a certain amount of trouble here in the lower house that will inevitably impact the progress of the pension reform that’s going badly.” Prosecutors accused Temer of “leading a criminal organization” that received or was promised more than 1.8 billion reais ($471 million) in funds diverted from several state-owned companies and public works, including construction of Angra 3, an unfinished nuclear power plant in the state of Rio de Janeiro, according to a statement. The preventative arrests were authorized by federal judge Marcelo Bretas in Rio. “Temer has been stealing from the country for the past 40 years,” Carwash prosecutor Jose Augusto Vagos said at a
press conference in Rio de Janeiro. A lawyer for Temer said the arrest constituted one of the most serious attacks on the rule of law in Brazil. His legal team also submitted a request for habeas corpus. Moreira Franco’s lawyers said in a statement they disagree with the judge’s decision, and that the former minister remains willing to assist with investigations. The benchmark Ibovespa stock index fell as much as 2.6 percent. The real was one of the worst performers among major currencies, tumbling by as much as 1.6 percent in afternoon trading. The leader of the ruling PSL party in the lower house, Delegado Waldir, said the arrests won’t “contaminate” the reform debate because they were already expected. Yet Temer’s MDB party criticized the decision in a statement, saying there’s no sign that neither Temer nor Moreira Franco committed any wrongdoing. “Everyone is accountable for their own actions,” President Jair Bolsonaro said on a visit to Chile. “It is clear that the kind of politics carried out in the name of governability in the past did not work. It was not correct.” Temer was charged with corruption and money laundering
in December, along with five others. The former president denied any wrongdoing in the case. He is also being investigated for allegedly receiving bribes from JBS owner Joesley Batista. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.