Just last month Eskom implemented stage 4 load shedding, the highest load it’s ever had to shed since the national power grid first starting experiencing strain. This was after six of its generation units went down, meaning that it lost about 40% of its generation capacity. This latest threat of power outages also comes just days after several suburbs in Johannesburg were hit by sudden power outages, an occurrence which the utility was quick to clarify was not part of its load shedding programme. Eskom told Eyewitness News that its technicians “found that the fault was due to an error in the maintenance procedure which affected 20 substations feeding electricity to over 20 suburbs”. Monday’s statement by Eskom did not indicate whether further incidences of load shedding were to be expected during the course of the week. Eskom’s senior general manager, Andrew Etzinger, told Daily Maverick that no units were currently down, however, the system was significantly strained due to recurring technical issues with the units, which they “are working on”. He said suppliers giving them poor quality coal was one of the main causes of generation units not functioning efficiently, and that they were working to make sure that suppliers who supply this kind of coal are held accountable. On the prospect of load shedding for the rest of the week, Etzinger said: “We are not predicting load shedding, but it’s certainly a possibility. The system is very tight at the moment.” DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.