The presidency said in January it would ask parliament to agree to a minimum wage of 27,000 naira for employees in the private sector and of state governments, while federal government workers would get 30,000 naira. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Related A poet’s perspective of a revolutionary food affair To Adri Senekal De Wet: The soul is dead at Independent Carbon Tax Bill gift-wrapped for big emitters: At last, South Africa is getting a (weak) carbon tax Eskom’s coal addiction, Medupi way, brought to you by the World Bank Unemployment: Our biggest problem Rwanda’s successes continue to confound its critics Explore Daily Maverick Tjips! A Joburg joint with more klap than slap Meandos aside, Duduzane and Jonas agree on  three key facts Implicated in corruption? Behaved unethically? Lied under oath? We humbly ask you to please withdraw from the ANC’s electoral list Nhlanhla Nene urges EFF to produce ‘incriminating’ PIC dope Meet the Watsons: They will make the Guptas look like amateurs The five best reasons not to believe in God