Sub-Saharan Africa’s third-largest carrier could instead consider the larger 787 Dreamliner or acquire planes from rival Airbus SE, according to Chairman Michael Joseph. The carrier has yet to place firm orders for aircraft but has to expand the fleet to realize its growth strategy, he said.  3 “The number of aircraft we need in this range is not yet determined,” Joseph said. “As no decision has been taken yet, we will carefully follow the developments around the 737 Max. Studies may also show that we could enlarge our 737-800 fleet and of course as a responsible buyer, we also look at the Airbus options.”  1 A switch to Airbus could follow a similar move by Indonesia’s Lion Air, which plans to drop a $22 billion order for 737 Max jets in favor of planes made by Boeing’s arch rival, a person with knowledge of the proposal said earlier on Tuesday. One of Lion Air’s own Max planes crashed on Oct. 29, killing 189 people. An Ethiopian Airlines jet followed on Sunday, and 32 of the 157 who died were Kenyan citizens, the most from a single country. In a dramatic day of developments following the Ethiopian Airlines crash, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency suspended all flights by the 737 Max while investigators probe the incident. Flights were halted across the globe from China to Argentina, leaving Boeing sweating on the fate of thousands of plane orders for the former best seller. Read More: Boeing Reels as Europe Joins Global Backlash Against 737 Max  1 The Kenyan carrier last year revived long-shelved plans to expand its network by proposing to buy as many as ten 737 Max aircraft as part of a five-year strategy. The jets appealed because of better aerodynamics and fuel efficiency, which would help Kenya Airways start more long-haul routes, an executive from the company said at the time. “We wish to state that no Kenyan air operator has in their fleet the affected aircraft type known as the Boeing 737 Max,” Kenyan Transport Secretary James Macharia said in a statement on Tuesday. “In addition, no foreign carrier is currently operating the aircraft type in Kenyan airspace,” he said in the statement. Kenya Airways has 39 aircraft including eight 787 dreamliners and eight 787-800s, according to information on its website. The carrier completed a reorganization in 2017 that resulted in the Kenyan government increasing its stake to 48.9 percent from 29.8 percent, and Air France-KLM shrinking its shareholding to to 7.8 percent from 26.7 percent. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.