“We have sent a letter to Boeing requesting that the order be cancelled,” Garuda spokesman Ikhsan Rosan said. “The reason is that Garuda passengers in Indonesia have lost trust and no longer have the confidence” in the plane, he said, adding the airline was awaiting a response from Boeing. Boeing officials will visit Indonesia next week to discuss Garuda’s plans to call off the order. Garuda already received one of the planes, Rosan said, part of a 50-aircraft order worth $4.9bn at list prices when it was announced in 2014. The airline is also talking to Boeing about whether to return the plane it has received, the spokesman said. The carrier has so far paid Boeing about $26m, while the company’s head told Indonesian media outlet Detik it would consider switching to a new version of the single-aisle jet. “In principle, it’s not that we want to replace Boeing, but maybe we will replace [these planes] with another model,” Garuda Indonesia director I Gusti Ngurah Askhara Danadiputra told Detik. ‘Probably not the last’ Shukor Yusof, head of Malaysia-based aviation consultancy Endau Analytics, said Garuda’s announcement appeared to mark the first formal plans by a carrier to cancel an order for the 737 MAX 8. “[It] will probably not be the last. There is a risk that Garuda’s rival Lion Air, which also has many 737 MAX 8 orders, might make the same decision,” he said. “That is a risk. This has been made public by the Lion Air CEO. He stated publicly that he is considering” a cancellation. He added it was difficult to predict whether more major carriers would follow suit. “There are many unanswered questions and each airline has specific needs,” Yusof said. “Each airline needs to deliberate how they want to strategise their fleet management.” This month, Lion Air said it was postponing delivery of four of the jets after an Ethiopian Airlines Boeing 737 MAX 8 went down minutes into a flight to Nairobi, killing all 157 people on board. Budget carrier Lion – Southeast Asia’s biggest airline by fleet size and a major Boeing customer – said the planes had been on order for delivery this year, but the company was re-evaluating the situation. Lion Air operates 10 Max 8 jets, part of a then-record $22bn order from Boeing made in 2011. The airlines are the only two that use the Max 8 in Indonesia. Erratic decents The Ethiopian tragedy came after a Lion Air jet of the same model crashed in Indonesia in October, killing all 189 people on board.  1 Both planes reportedly experienced erratic steep climbs and descents as well as fluctuating airspeeds before crashing shortly after take-off.  1 Investigators have honed in on an automated anti-stalling system introduced on the plane, which is designed to point the nose of the plane downward if it is in danger of stalling. The development comes as the US manufacturer struggles to cope with the fallout from the two crashes, which have cast a spotlight on the safety certification process and shaken confidence in a plane that is crucial to its future plans. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.