On Sunday, he spoke to the national broadcaster on the sidelines of an election campaign appearance in the northern town of Mahikeng to say sorry for some of the most severe power cuts South Africans have yet experienced. The next day, he joined commuters on a 45-minute train trip to the capital, Pretoria. Unexplained delays meant that the trip lasted more than three hours and he was late for a meeting of the ruling party’s leadership.  3 It’s not an ideal situation for a man who is trying to convince voters to back his African National Congress in elections in May, when many of them already blame the party for the country’s inadequate public transport and failing power grid.  1 Having already said that he plans to restructure the state power utility, Ramaphosa kept up his tough talk while stuck on the train.  4 It’s going to take more than that to convince potential voters. DM  1 Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Also on Daily Maverick Analysis: Zuma’s Gravity pull, or what remains of it Africa Check: Does South Africa face an electricity grid collapse? Related Analysis: Zuma’s Gravity pull, or what remains of it Africa Check: Does South Africa face an electricity grid collapse? Power Deck: How will Zuma deal out his SONA cards? Op-Ed: It is all about political capital Why Moyane can be fired but court won't order Gigaba and Dlamini's sacking Analysis: Dipping back into the Age of Gedleyihlekisa? Explore Daily Maverick How a South African man became the world’s most notorious cyber-criminal The Boeing 737 MAX : a cocktail of a devil in the system, uber-pilots and negotiable safety The 'vile and venom' of Moyane vs Gordhan meets Zondo Intimidation, interception and break-ins: SA security forces and the threat of accountability How to kill a baby, naturally! Arguments against evolution, and why they’re wrong