Scientists at IciStem, a consortium of European scientists researching use of stem cell transplants to treat the illness, say an anonymous London-based patient has achieved long-term “remission”. The patient, diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma, received a bone-marrow transplant in 2016 and was given immunosuppressive drugs. He stopped taking his H.I.V. medication in September of 2017.  1 Researchers will publish their report in the science journal Nature on Tuesday, and present some of the details at the upcoming Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections in Seattle.  2 The London-based patient is the second man after Timothy Ray Brown to be declared cured of H.I.V.. Brown, who now lives in California, was described free of H.I.V. in 2007 after receiving transplant treatment for his leukemia. DM  2 Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.