The formal South African Enterprise Sector is critically ill. Were the company tax returns of the 768,000 companies combined and submitted as that of a single entity (say SA Amalgamated Pty Ltd) there would not have been any Company Income Tax (CIT) payable to SARS for three consecutive tax years.  1 SARS data on Company Income Tax (CIT) confirms that the private sector is in a dismal state. In the tax years 2014 – 2016 assessed joint losses of all companies surpassed joint taxable income by R445-billion. SARS data on CIT from 2007 to 2016 on assessed CIT returns bring the following to the fore: To understand these figures, it is important to keep the following in mind: Only 0.75% of the firms with taxable turnover above R100-million pay 85% of all company income tax into SARS coffers. With 42% of the 2017 company tax returns already assessed by SARS, a fourth year of being in the red seems most likely. Consider in addition: A public sector that had metamorphosed from a facilitator of services and infrastructure into a parasite not delivering proper education, proper law enforcement and reliable infrastructure. Mike Schüssler of Economist.co.za reckons that indicates that since mid-2018 the turnover growth of companies in the non-financial sector is negative when considering inflation. Based on Angelo Agrizzi’s evidence at the Zondo commission about bribe money, one can state that he had packed annually stacks of bribe money that exceeded the taxable income of 98% of the country’s formal enterprises. The government appears to be totally unaware of the negative impact of its policies and poor performance on the private sector, especially the small and medium enterprises. DM Johannes Wessels is the Director of the Enterprise Observatory of SA. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.