Gregory and Amy Colburn conspired to launder money and commit wire fraud by paying college admissions counselor William Rick Singer, the plot’s ringleader, to have a proctor correct their son’s answers on the SAT college entrance exam, prosecutors said. One other parent, David Sidoo, was previously indicted for twice paying $100,000 for a surrogate to take tests for his two sons. He has pleaded not guilty.  1 The Colburns and Sidoo are among 33 parents charged in the scandal, which erupted March 12 when federal prosecutors in Boston announced the sweeping case. Singer pleaded guilty and has cooperated with prosecutors, secretly recording conversations with parents. Calls and emails to David Schumacher, an attorney for the Colburns, weren’t immediately returned.  2 The indictment signals that prosecutors are taking a hard line with at least some of the parents by indicting them for felonies that carry significant prison time. So far, most of them have been charged only in a criminal complaint — essentially a statement of facts made by an FBI agent — and, legal experts said, they may seek plea deals for misdemeanors that would keep them out of jail. An indictment is more serious, suggesting the government may not be as lenient in negotiations. Other parents may risk a trial to clear their names. Parents in College Scandal Hire Formidable Array of Lawyers  Parents Who Cop to College Admissions Scam May Stay Out of Jail  For Mastermind of Vast College Racket, Fat Fees Weren’t Enough   ’ Home Run of Home Runs’: How to Bribe Your Kid Into College  The 1590 SAT Score Blues: College Plot Betrays American Strivers  College Arms Race Goes Too Far as Rich Game the SystemProsecutors say they recorded a phone call between Singer and the Colburns in which Singer said his charity was being audited and that they should tell the IRS their contributions were intended for needy children — and not bribes for a proctor. It was apparently a ruse by Singer, who was then cooperating with the government, so that the Colburns would implicate themselves. “This payment was made to our foundation in lieu of, but we both know that, Mark took the test,” Singer said, in a reference to alleged accomplice Mark Riddell. “Right. It was to help underserved kids … Got it. No problem,” Colburn replied, according to prosecutors. The U.S. says wealthy parents — including celebrities, a top mergers attorney and a venture-capital CEO — paid Singer to get their kids into schools including Yale, Georgetown, Stanford, Wake Forest and the University of Southern California. He used the funds they gave him, through a charity he had set up, to pay off test administrators and a surrogate test taker and to bribe college coaches to designate applicants as athletic recruits, according to the charges. The parents paid a total of $25 million from 2011 to 2018, the government claims, for admission to a top university. Singer claimed he engineered almost 800 bribes. While the bribes to coaches were typically in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, other payoffs were more modest. Prosecutors say the Colburns, of Palo Alto, California, paid $25,000 in cash and stock for Riddell to correct their son’s answers at a West Hollywood testing center. Riddell helped him score an 1190, which was submitted to Texas Christian University, Indiana University and the universities of Oregon and Arizona — schools not previously mentioned in the case. Ridell took the SAT for Sidoo’s older son and got a 1460, which was sent to Chapman University, and earned a 2280 score for his younger son, which went to Yale, Georgetown and the University of California at Berkeley, the U.S. said. In other instances, Ridell provided answers for students whose scores were sent to Boston University, Boston College and Northeastern University in Massachusetts, prosecutors said. Riddell, who worked in test prep at a private Florida school, has agreed to plead guilty to conspiracy and money laundering, according to a court filing. More than a dozen parents are scheduled to appear in court on Friday. The Colburns were among them, but their indictment means a new date will be set. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.