The article, which focused on the role of General Tarique Ahmed Siddique, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s security adviser and the Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI), the country’s military intelligence agency, was published on Wednesday afternoon, Bangladesh time. By the evening most readers inside Bangladesh could not access the website. The piece was done by Al Jazeera’s Investigation Unit. Joban, a local news and discussion site which published a summary of the article in Bengali was also inaccessible. This is not the first time that the government of Bangladesh has blocked foreign news websites. In November 2017, Indian news website The Wire was cut off after it published a story on the alleged role of DGFI in the disappearance of an academic, Mubashar Hasan. New system In the past, Bangladesh security agencies blocked websites by sending an instruction to the Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission (BTRC) which then emailed all International Internet Gateways. However, in recent months, the Department of Telecommunications (DOT) and the National Telecommunication Monitoring Centre (NTMC) have rolled out a new system that allows the agencies to block websites centrally without having to involve the BTRC. The Bangladesh government has become increasingly sensitive to criticism in recent years. Last weekend, Mahfuza Akhter Kiron who leads the women’s wing of the Bangladesh Football Federation and is a council member of the world footballing body FIFA, was arrested and jailed for three days after criticising the prime minister for failing to give sufficient financial support to football and instead prioritising cricket. And just before December elections, the government also closed 58 local news sites, many that supported opposition parties, after officials claimed that they published “fake and baseless news”. However the government consistently denies that the country’s media is restricted. 190219155030486 In an interview on Al Jazeera’s Head to Head programme, broadcast earlier this month, Gowher Rizvi, the foreign affairs advisor to the prime minister said, “Those who know the media in Bangladesh, know one thing. That it is free. It is vigorous.” On the same programme, the Bangladesh High Commissioner for the UK, Ms. Saida Muna Tasneem said that, “Sheikh Hasina is being criticised left and right. “There are newspapers criticising Sheikh Hasina. In the parliament she is being criticised. So why wouldn’t Bangladesh have press freedom.” “Restricting access is not the way to respond to these allegations,” Ali Riaz, a professor of politics and government at Illinois State University told Al Jazeera. “Restrictions on the media and access to cyberspace have become hallmarks of the system of governance in Bangladesh in the past years. Access to information, and free flow of information are progressively being curtailed in the country, steps that are not only contrary to the democratic spirit, but unhelpful and in the long run, counter productive.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.