After topping the Economist Intelligence Unit’s Worldwide Cost of Living Survey for five years, Asia’s Lion City (Singapore) has been joined by Paris and Hong Kong in a tie at the top of the table. Zurich and Geneva rounded out the top five, while New York and Los Angeles reclaimed spots in the top 10 — ranking in seventh and 10th respectively — after slipping to 13th and 14th last year thanks to a weakening dollar. The survey is designed to help companies calculate cost-of-living allowances and build compensation packages for expatriates and business travellers. The trio of cities sharing the top spot are 7 percent more expensive to live in than New York, according to the EIU, which compiles its list from a survey of 160 products and services across 93 countries. The Japanese port city of Osaka was another re-entry, moving up six spots to number five. Seoul (joint seventh place), Copenhagen (also seventh) and Tel Aviv (10th) round out the top 10 — which actually consists of 11 cities thanks to tied places. Also on Daily Maverick Capitals: Africa's poorest, world's costliest Slim standard of life upgrade for Gautengers “Weaker local currencies have pushed all five Australian and two New Zealand cities surveyed down in the ranking,” the EIU said, accounting for Sydney’s absence after it scraped into 10th position in last year’s report. Outside the top 10, the EIU said the cost of living in Chinese cities remains relatively stable, while Southeast Asian destinations were moving up the ranks. One of the factors behind Asia’s strong showing at the top of the table is that some Asian cities are among the world’s priciest locations for general grocery shopping, according to the EIU. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Related Capitals: Africa's poorest, world's costliest Slim standard of life upgrade for Gautengers David Makhura talks of big achievements in Gauteng despite Life Esidimeni tragedy Diabetes: It’s time to act Op-Ed: ‘World Class’ – Cape Town’s contradictory Quality of Life Africa Check: Do 5 million immigrants live in S. Africa? The New York Times exaggerates number Explore Daily Maverick Don’t 'Over-Zumanise' State Capture; it’s much deeper – Mcebisi Jonas ANC lists will bring about new-look back benches, including premiers, MECs and tainted politicians PwC's Steinhoff report suggests profit was boosted by R106bn in seven years The ANC electoral list was chosen from the ground, by members - Ramaphosa Arguments against evolution, and why they’re wrong How to kill a baby, naturally!