The term encompasses a group of Australia’s better known technology stocks: WiseTech Global Ltd., Appen Ltd., Altium Ltd., Afterpay Touch Group Ltd. and Xero Ltd. And they’ve been good bets so far: WAAAX shares have outperformed their China and U.S. peers as investors sought exposure to the global rally that has sent U.S. tech equities soaring since 2017. The jump is all thanks to the shift to cloud-based technology and Australia’s plan to open 5G networks, according to Camille Simeon, a Sydney-based investment manager at Aberdeen Standard Investments. “Compared to what else is on offer in the Australian market, the WAAAX names have a very attractive growth outlook,” she said. Another reason for the rally is that investors are seeing the success of the
FAANGs in the U.S. and are hoping to replicate those gains, according to John Athanasiou, chief executive officer at Red Leaf Securities. But the Australian stocks will need to back up the momentum with revenue to keep the rally going, he said. “With all rallies, eventually reality has to kick in,” Athanasiou said by phone. “The fundamentals have to be proven.” A breakdown of how the stocks in the WAAAX complex have done: WiseTech Global, a logistics software maker, has risen more than 110 percent in the past year, sending its market value to A$7 billion ($5 billion) Appen, which specializes in artificial intelligence, has swelled 152 percent, with its market cap reaching A$2.9 billion Altium, a design software maker for microchip companies, has risen 55 percent and is now worth A$4.5 billion Afterpay Touch, a buy-now, pay-later service popular with millennials that’s expanding into the U.S. and Europe, has soared almost 200 percent, and its value stands at A$4.9 billion Xero, which makes cloud-based accounting software, has climbed 43 percent and is worth $A6.9 billion. To be sure, some of the companies aren’t yet profitable and investors need to look at different measures to validate their potential. For Xero, they’re focusing on
cash flow as the firm aims to break even within its current cash balance. Afterpay Touch discusses in its corporate filings the number of consumers and retailers adopting its platform while trying to minimize the proportion of its revenue from late fees. The industry has also weathered some big-name letdowns. GetSwift Ltd., a maker of delivery software, soared more than 1,000 percent in the year following its initial public offering at the end of 2016, only to see its stock price
collapse after the company disclosed that some of its contracts were only for trial periods. Video-marketing company Big Un Ltd., whose shares surged almost 1,500 percent in 2017, was delisted last year after
revelations that some of its customers paid for services with money advanced by one of its investors. Australia hasn’t traditionally been known for tech stocks as financials, energy and mining account for more than half of the benchmark S&P/ASX 200 Index. Tech makes up less than 3 percent of the gauge, compared with more than 20 percent for the S&P 500 Index. ASX Ltd. has seen 67 initial public offerings of tech companies over the last three years, collectively raising A$1.46 billion, a spokesperson for the bourse said, citing Dealogic. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.