Botha said this is mostly due to the two big events expected this week – the SA Reserve Bank’s interest rate decision on Thursday and Moody’s expected credit rating announcement on Friday. By 10:16, the rand was changing hands at R14.48 to the greenback. Subscribe to Fin24’s newsletter here  1 Botha, in a morning note to clients, said the central bank’s Monetary Policy Committee was expected to keep rates on hold and “probably echo the cautionary tale that the Fed had regarding growth and global conditions”. “Then the much spoken about Moody’s rating decision … we expect Moody’s to keep their outlook unchanged despite the current bout of load shedding and EM worries in the market,” he said. READ : Moody’s: SA’s future looks brighter – if it can keep the lights on Emerging market currencies were generally on the backfoot, he said. “The EM joy that came with the US Fed’s dovish stance last week, was relatively short-lived with the rand retreating back to the R14.50 level at the end of Friday’s trading. “The reason for this retreat was first, the fact that European data disappointed which caused concerns to be expressed regarding global growth and second the fact that the Turkish Lira lost over 5% of its value, as there was an unexpected drop in their central banks foreign reserves,” he said. “This spilled over in other EM markets and we saw the rand on a slippery slope on Friday.” Botha said it was likely that the rand would be range-bound in the interim. READ : Moody’s could take dim view on load shedding next week, economists warn Bianca Botes, Corporate Treasury Manager at Peregrine Treasury Solutions, said in a morning note that while power utility Eskom had suspended load shedding, global growth concerns, confirmed by weak EU and US data, were driving market participants to safe haven assets. “Emerging market currencies are once again under pressure. Following the brief relief of last week when the rand gained almost 2% against the greenback, the local unit has given up all the ground it had gained,” she said. Botes said the rand was expected to trade at an intraday range of R14.45 to R14.58/$. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.