The party sent out a statement saying it would hold a media conference in Parliament on Thursday to “welcome Vytjie Mentor together with other people of influence who have chosen to join the ACDP over that of many other political parties”.  3 Party leaders would also give an update on its election campaign. It is not yet clear what role Mentor will fill or how many others are expected to join on that day. On her Facebook page on Tuesday morning, Mentor greeted her followers with “good morning world” and posted a photo of a slice of cake and the Bible opened up on a chapter of Samuel, which describes how unspiritual Saul became very spiritual and was later proclaimed king. Mentor, who used to be a senior ANC MP and chairperson of the portfolio committee on public works, came into the spotlight in March 2016 when she claimed that the Gupta family offered her a post as a minister. Besides talking about state capture and the Marikana shooting in her book No Holy Cows , she also detailed her alleged experience of the extent of sexual harassment in the ruling party. Mentor gave her evidence to the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture and was later cross-examined. She took issue with several records that were put forward against her testimony, including SAA and Department of Home Affairs records. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.