The IEC said in a statement on Friday that since its inception ahead of the 1999 national and provincial elections, the voters’ roll has shown steady growth of more than 47% and currently contains the most registered voters. Of the total number of eligible voters for the May 8 elections, 55% are women. Gauteng has the highest number of registered voters at 6.3m or 23.8% of the total number of national voters.  1 According to the IEC, Gauteng is followed by KwaZulu-Natal with 5.5m eligible voters (20.6%), and the Eastern Cape with 3.3m voters (12.5%). The Northern Cape has the lowest number of registered voters accounting for just 2% of the country’s voters, with just over 600 000 registrations. Adults aged between 30 and 39 account for almost 25% of the voters’ roll. Almost 700 000 of them are registered to cast their votes. In provincial elections, 36 parties have been certified to contest for the Gauteng legislature, 34 for the Western Cape and Limpopo, and 31 for KwaZulu-Natal. Mpumalanga and the Free State have 28 registered parties while the Northern Cape has 21, despite low voter registration turnout. The North West has 29 parties battling it out for votes, and in the Eastern Cape there are 26. Just over 29 000 South Africans living outside the country have been given the green light to vote. IEC spokesperson Kate Bapela has reminded voters to remember to take along their identity documents – either a green barcoded ID, a smartcard or a valid temporary ID certificate – to cast their votes come election day. According to chief electoral officer Sy Mamabolo, 48 political parties are expected to contest the national elections on May 8. This is 19 more than the number of parties that contested the 2014 general elections. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.