The Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority, a quasi-public body, voted to move ahead on talks with Boring Co., with the goal of voting on a contract by June. Ensuing talks would nail down details like the proposed route and the types of vehicles used for a project that aims to make it easier for visitors to get around Las Vegas’s sprawling convention center. After the addition of a new exhibition hall scheduled to open by 2021, the complex will run two miles in length.  1 On Tuesday, Musk tweeted in celebration of the vote: “Looking forward to building a Boring Company tunnel in Vegas. Assuming to be operational by end of year!” Steve Davis, the president of Boring Co., spoke on Tuesday to the authority’s board at their monthly meeting, where the vote took place. The company has promised to build the tunnel for $30 million to $55 million, agency spokeswoman Jackie Dennis said. She described the price tag as significantly cheaper than the five other proposals reviewed by the agency’s evaluation team. The project would be paid for largely with money from the convention authority’s general fund, which itself is funded mostly by hotel room taxes in Las Vegas. The $935 million convention center expansion comes from a separate allocation approved by Nevada legislators. Rides on the new Boring Co. service would be free to convention-goers. Vegas is presenting itself as the type of place where Boring Co. could move ahead quickly, avoiding headwinds the company has faced in other areas. While a test tunnel opened in the Los Angeles area last year, another proposed project in the region was scuttled after opposition from neighborhood groups. In Chicago, a proposed project’s future is in doubt due to the retirement of its biggest supporter, Mayor Rahm Emanuel. A project connecting Washington to Baltimore is waylaid in the environmental-review process. The regulatory hurdles are formidable enough that separately, on Tuesday, the U.S. Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao announced the creation of a government council to help overcome “jurisdictional and regulatory gaps” and speed the deployment of new technology such as “tunneling, hyperloop, autonomous vehicles and other innovations.” In Las Vegas, the Convention and Visitors Authority owns the convention center and almost all the land where the proposed tunnel would run, meaning there’s less bureaucracy and fewer required approvals, Dennis said. One portion of the tunnel would likely run under a Clark County street, meaning some additional permissions would still be required. While no plans currently exist to expand the project beyond the convention center, Dennis said the system could one day be extended to reach the Las Vegas Strip and the airport. Currently, an existing 3.9-mile monorail ferries visitors up and down the Strip and to the convention center. Passengers routinely complain about the long lines and high fares—$5 for a single trip. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.