“AfriForum will fund the appeal costs to allow Advocate Barry Roux SC to take on the case. Advocate Gerrie Nel and his team at AfriForum’s private prosecution unit also provides support in investigating the case,” AfriForum said after Wednesday’s sentencing.  1 “The application to appeal will be brought within fourteen days.” Pieter Doorewaard and Phillip Schutte were found guilty of murder, kidnapping, intimidation, theft, and pointing a firearm after Moshoeu was killed on April 20, 2017.  2 His death caused immense turmoil and protests in the North West town, with many believing it was as a result of racism.  1 Moshoeu was thrown from a moving vehicle after being accused of stealing sunflowers. The two men had claimed that he jumped from a vehicle while they were taking him to the police station. On Wednesday, North West High Court Judge Ronnie Hendricks said the murder was not planned or premeditated, but a case of dolus eventualis – which means they should have expected something bad to happen as a result of their actions.  1 READ: Coligny murder: Men sentenced to 23 and 18 years in jail Roux confirmed to News24 that he had been briefed by the men’s attorney, not AfriForum, and that he would be taking the case. He said he still needed to read the court papers. “I have been approached by the attorney who acted in the trial,” he said. AfriForum said the appeal was as a result of witness Bonakele Pakisi allegedly lying during the trial.  1 Pistorius trial They said they had already collected four affidavits in this regard, and also wanted the witness to be charged with perjury. However, handing down judgment, Hendricks stated that the two had kidnapped and assaulted Pakisi, and forced him to eat his own vomit.  4 News24 reported on Wednesday that accused Number 1, Doorewaard, was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment for murder, three years for kidnapping, two years for intimidation, one year for theft, and two years for pointing of a firearm. He will effectively serve 18 years in total. Accused Number 2, Schutte, was handed 20 years for murder, three years for kidnapping, two years for intimidation, one year for theft, and two years for pointing of a firearm. He will effectively serve a total of 23 years.  2 Roux came up against Nel in the prosecution of paralympian Oscar Pistorius for the murder of his girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp in 2013. In that case, the judge also found it to be a case of dolus eventualis and, on appeal, the sentence was increased to 13 years. Roux became famous for his saying “I put it to you” during his exhaustive questioning of witnesses in the Pistorius trial. Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.