O’Rourke was prepared to make a formal announcement on Thursday and planned to head to Iowa, the site of the first 2020 caucus, one of the Democrats said, but word began to get out on Wednesday night. The two Democrats spoke on the condition on anonymity to discuss O’Rourke’s campaign. The former Texas congressman narrowly lost a Senate contest to Republican incumbent Ted Cruz last fall, but managed to build a nationwide following with his unconventional and optimistic style combined with a populist message that brought in almost $80 million in mostly small donations. Speculation and doubts about O’Rourke’s intentions were fueled by his musings on blog posts as he traveled about the country after leaving Congress at the beginning of January. “Have been stuck lately. In and out of a funk,” he wrote on Jan. 16. Early polls of potential Democratic nominees put O’Rourke, 46, in the top tier of candidates. But his challenge will be to show the party’s voters where he fits between the unabashed progressive stances of Senators Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren and centrists such as Senator Amy Klobuchar. Senators Kamala Harris and Cory Booker are attempting to straddle party factions with their campaigns. Read More: Ocasio-Cortez, O’Rourke Steal Some Thunder From 2020 Democrats  1 Last month, O’Rourke and the man he hopes to unseat, President Donald Trump, held dueling rallies in Texas, with each using the president’s proposed wall on the U.S.-Mexico border as an early proxy for the 2020 election. Vanity Fair published a long article about O’Rourke on Wednesday evening, with photographs by Annie Leibovitz. In it, he said of a presidential run: “I want to be in it. Man, I’m just born to be in it.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.