Bond yields in Australia and New Zealand dropped to record lows on Monday, after a closely-watched part of the U.S. curve inverted for the first time since 2007 on global growth woes. Trading volumes in Treasury future were more than double the norm in the Asian morning, while Japanese sovereign bonds rallied. “Bond markets globally, along with dovish central banks, have been telling us a slowdown is on the way,” Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at Oanda Corp., said in Singapore. “Some parts of the world will be better equipped than others to handle this. The U.S. can at least cut rates and apply monetary tools, while things could be worse for Europe and Japan, where they cannot.” Yields in the U.S. have led a global decline amid bets that a recession and a Fed rate-cutting cycle are coming. The spread between yields on three-month U.S. bills and 10-year notes inverted for the first time on Friday since the financial crisis amid reports showing economic weakness in France and Germany, while an index of American manufacturing slowed. “Data is deteriorating globally,” said Tano Pelosi, portfolio manager at Antares Capital in Sydney. “ It’s very unlikely that the Fed will hike again for some time.” Yields on Australia’s 10-year bond fell as much as eight basis points to 1.756 percent, while New Zealand’s dropped to 1.899 percent, a record low in data compiled by Bloomberg starting in 1985. In Japan, the benchmark yield fell 1.5 basis points to minus 0.095 percent. Australian bonds, which are sensitive to global growth sentiment, have rallied since central bank Governor Philip Lowe pivoted to a neutral stance last month from a long-held view the next move in rates would be up. The local yield curve flattened further, with the difference between three and 10-year yields narrowing by 2 basis points to 38 basis points. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.