Sterling was the best-performing Group-of-10 currency on Wednesday as investors bet lawmakers would rule out what is seen by businesses and economists as the worst-case scenario. The result means Parliament will vote Thursday to decide whether to postpone the U.K.’s exit from the EU in just over two weeks’ time. The development came after Parliament a day earlier rejected a revised version of the withdrawal agreement that Prime Minister Theresa May has spent the past two years negotiating with the EU. May is planning to ask the EU for an extension to the March 29 Brexit deadline lasting about two months, according to people familiar with the matter. “The removal of a no-deal exit is crucial for pound direction,” Neil Jones, head of hedge-fund currency sales at Mizuho Bank Ltd., said before Wednesday’s vote. “I would expect the pound to gain further, and structurally put a floor under the currency for the longer term.” Sterling rose 1.4 percent to $1.3256, and is poised for its biggest advance since November. It strengthened about 1 percent to 85.51 pence per euro. Sterling is the strongest G-10 peer against the dollar this year, rallying from an almost 21-month low touched in January. On Wednesday, a measure of implied overnight volatility of the pound versus the greenback trailed its level ahead of Tuesday’s vote, suggesting investors were expecting the outcome. The motion on Wednesday isn’t legally binding and the U.K. could still potentially crash out of the EU on March 29 if no Brexit deal is agreed on and no delay is granted by the bloc. “It should give the government a strong mandate to agree with the EU,” said Commerzbank currency strategist Esther Reichelt. “But in the end, the Parliament might not like the conditions attached to a delay by the EU.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Related Pound Surges, U.K. Stocks Fall as May Seen Delaying Exit From EU Pound hit by 'flash crash' in biggest fall since Brexit May Gives Tories Free Vote on Key Amendment: Brexit Update Pound Jumps as May Gets New Brexit Deal Ahead of Parliament Vote 'Thanks Brexit': Pound nears euro parity Pound plunges as UK ministers quit over Brexit deal Explore Daily Maverick Robert McBride: Caught in the jaws of State Capture, adrift in the present while captive of the past Change is happening — and positive people can decide to #Stay&Fix South Africa Jacob Zuma and his State [Capture] Security Agency’s nine wasted years of impunity Writing the 2019 Elections: Appeasing the EFF can only be a disaster for the ANC The Zuma power elite is alive, kicking and preparing to replace Ramaphosa Meet the 28s General who left the Number and lived to tell the tale through film