 Ilze Wolff, director at Wolff Architects, is the award-winning author of Unstitching Rex Trueform: the story of an African factory, a study following “the narrative of the site from the date of completion of the first factory in 1938 up until conversion of the site into an office park in 2013”. The site is Rex Trueform, a building that was constructed over 80 years ago as manufacturing factory in Cape Town. A decade after its erection, as the company grew, another building was added to the factory. Incorporated in the building plans for both, were segregation policies that were yet to be made into law by the apartheid regime that would come to define South African life in the second half of the 20th Century.  3 On Monday 11 February 2019, the 1948 building was classified as a provincial heritage site. “The Rex Trueform building is a building that I always passed as a student, it literally caught my attention because it has such a presence on Main road (Salt river). I have family that worked there, my aunties and uncles, my grandparents also worked at other factories like Rex Trueform. I was intrigued by its presence on Main Road, as well as the presence it has in people’s social imagination,” says Wolff. When she started studying towards a degree in Heritage and Public Culture, that fascination led her to study the building and “write its biography”. Initially she wrote it as a thesis, and later expanded into a book that went on to win the L’erma di Bretschneider C International Prize for scholarly works in Modern and Contemporary Art. Here is her story intertwined with Rex Trueform, 263 Victoria Road, Salt River, Cape Town. ML Timeline: 1938: First building by architect Max Policansky 1944: Much of the building was burnt in a fire 1944: Rebuilt and extended by architects Andrews & Niegeman 1948: A second factory building is built across the road from the initial building by Andrews & Niegeman 1963: An extension is added to the 1948 building Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.