Both men were arrested on Friday morning, 1 March, on charges of fraud and corruption relating to a R86-million blue lights tender. Phahlane and Pillay are expected to appear at the Johannesburg Commercial Crimes Court later today.  17 They will be joining former Gauteng police commissioner, Deliwe de Lange, national divisional commissioner in charge of supply chain management, Lieutenant General Ramahlapi Mokwena, Brigadier James Ramajalum and Gauteng deputy police commissioner Nombhuruza Napo in the dock.  20 The tender for the supply of blue lights, sirens and radios for SAPS vehicles was awarded to millionaire businessman, Vimpie Manthatha’s Traffic Law Enforcement company in 2016. It is alleged that the businessman supplied a fake tax clearance certificate to SAPS in tendering for the lucrative job.  8 McBride is currently challenging in court the manner in which his contract was ended.  DM  11 Note: This is a developing story.    Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.