National police spokesperson Vish Naidoo said because of the public outrage and the evidence in the form of the video, the police decided to investigate the case. “Because of the video and the social media activity that has been taking place, we decided to investigate the case and in order to justify an investigation, we opened an inquiry docket,” Naidoo told News24.  1 Naidoo added that, when Babes, real name Bongekile Simelane reports the case and submits a statement, that would therefore add value to the investigation. ‘Open a case’ Earlier News24 reported that the National police commissioner General Khehla Sitole ordered the police to trace the whereabouts of Simelane. Sitole’s office issued a statement on Monday afternoon, calling on her to open a case “at a police station nearest to her” after the  video footage emerged. In May last year, Metro FM host Masechaba Ndlovu, while interviewing Simelane live on air, claimed the was being abused Mampintsha artist. Denial Maphumulo, released a statement soon after radio interview, denying he was a “monster” and saying he loves Simelane. He said he wished God would “help her see that our enemies are gunning to destroy our relationship”. He questioned when she was going to defend him when he defends her all the time. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.