The release was ordered after the Riyadh court reviewed a request from the defendants, the state-run Saudi Press Agency reported. The press agency didn’t identify the defendants, but they are among at least 10 women who were detained last May along with male supporters and accused of undermining state security and the social fabric of the Islamic kingdom. Those standing trial include 29-year-old Loujain Al Hathloul, a prominent women’s rights activist, retired professor Aziza Alyousef, blogger Eman Al Nafjan, historian Hatoon al-Fassi and religious scholar Rokaya Almohareb. Earlier: Saudi Arabia Puts Group of Women’s Rights Activists on Trial “This is a long overdue step as these women should never have been jailed in the first place and their release should certainly not be on a ‘temporary’ basis,” Amnesty International said in a statement on Thursday. “They have been locked up, separated from their loved ones, subjected to torture and threats for simply peacefully calling for women’s rights and expressing their views.” Amnesty identified the released women as Al Nafjan, Alyousef and Almohareb. Ali Shihabi — who heads a pro-Saudi think tank in Washington — posted on Twitter a picture of Alyousef with her family after being released. Several had campaigned for years to end the ban on women driving in Saudi Arabia and spoke out against the guardianship system that requires permission from male relatives for women to travel abroad or marry. The driving ban was lifted a month after their arrests. Their detention caused controversy at home and abroad, especially after some said they had been tortured in custody. Saudi Arabia says they were not mistreated but the case was among a number that have cast a pall over Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s push to loosen many of the traditional restrictions in the kingdom and prepare the economy for a time after oil. In 2017, Saudi authorities rounded up hundreds of business people and members of the royal family in what the government said was a crackdown on corruption, but critics called a shake-down. The murder of government critic Jamal Khashoggi at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul last October drew international condemnation. Authorities vehemently deny the prince played any role in Khashoggi’s killing. The crown prince has said the women’s detention was unrelated to their activism. In an interview in October, he said authorities had evidence they had connections with foreign intelligence agencies and were leaking information. People familiar with the indictment have said, however, that Al-Hathloul’s charges include communicating with diplomats and journalists but makes no mention of ties to foreign intelligence. Saudi Woman Activist Charged With Diplomat, Reporter Contacts It’s not clear what charges the rest of the defendants face. Most observers believe Al- Hathloul’s case is the most serious. Western diplomats and journalists have been denied entry to the hearings. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.