The emergence of new details into the probe against the global retailer has resulted in the scope of the investigation being expanded, the presentation showed. The unit forms part of an elite police division focused on priority crimes, known as the Hawks. The composition of the investigating team has been enhanced and will also look into a report released on Friday by Steinhoff following a forensic probe by PwC, the crime unit said. The Hawks are also seeking mutual legal assistance and has engaged several regulators, such as the Reserve Bank and Financial Sector Conduct Authority. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Related The Zuma presidency, four years on: Point of no return? The Moonie church loses its grip on doctrine, money and leadership in slo-mo Iran brings new direction to Non-Aligned Movement Iss Today: How will ISIS setbacks impact Africa? 2014 International Person of the Year: Vladimir Putin The power of the ANC’s provinces could lead to the party’s demise Explore Daily Maverick Take note, Ebrahim Rasool, the Western Cape is the best-run province in the country Tjips! A Joburg joint with more klap than slap ANC lists will bring about new-look back benches, including premiers, MECs and tainted politicians PwC's Steinhoff report suggests profit was boosted by R106bn in seven years How to kill a baby, naturally! The five best reasons not to believe in God