“The ANC has championed the rule of law since the dawn of democracy and created a rules-based electoral system where political parties subscribe to a code of conduct. The ANC is firmly committed to the Electoral Code of Conduct and will not tolerate conduct by any of its members which is at odds with this code,” the party said.  1 On Friday, EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said: “Over the past two days, two strategically placed billboards of the EFF have been victim to this criminal unit, driven by political envy and intolerance.” Two incidents The political party said there were two incidents – one on the R21 south, between Olifantsfontein and a garage in Oakmoor – and the second at the Nhlazani railway station in Soweto.  2 The EFF claimed that the act exposed the governing party as “uninterested in a clean and peaceful campaign driven by democratic principles of political contestation enshrined in our Constitution”. It further lambasted “racist whites” in Tshwane for allegedly participating in similar activity.  1 “The EFF is targeted by both the hooligans of the low self-esteem driven ANC and the fools in right-wing white, racist formations. “Earlier this year, our posters were being vandalised and targeted by the racist whites in Pretoria, who were moving around under the cover of the night to undermine our rights to freedom of expression and political belonging by removing EFF manifesto launch posters,” Ndlozi added.  1 “Those who resort to such tactics must ultimately be disqualified from standing for elections. Thus, as soon as we have collected our evidence, we shall approach the Electoral Court to act decisively on the politically intolerant ANC,” Ndlozi said.  2 Dirty tricks But ANC acting national spokesperson, Dakota Legoete, said the ANC’s campaign was focused on reaching out to every voter and communicating its manifesto commitments of growing South Africa into a society where a better life for all was realised. “Dirty tricks have never been part of the ANC campaign and we will not take kindly to such conduct wherever it rears its ugly head,” Legoete added.  1 It advised the EFF to approach law enforcement with the evidence it claimed it had. DM  3 Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.