Activists should not stop working to fight for the rights of their communities, even though South Africans have been liberated from apartheid, said speakers at a panel discussion at Community House, a historic site of Cape Town’s activism. On Human Rights Day, Capetonians gathered at Community House to celebrate the building and its history through day-long cultural activities, film screenings and panel discussions. From the 1980s, many activists met and held resistance meetings in the Salt River site. Community House was declared a provincial heritage site by the Western Cape provincial government in 2012. One of the discussions for the day was titled “The Role of Activism in Democracy”.The main theme was that activism should be continued in communities, even though the apartheid regime had been defeated. Panel chair Brenda Leonard reminded the audience what 21 March actually stood for — the killing of apartheid resisters in Sharpeville, Gauteng, who refused to carry passbook. Leonard referred not only to the 69 people killed at Sharpeville, but to the resisters who handed themselves over to police stations across South Africa, including in Langa. Panellist Shirley Gunn, a former uMkhonto weSizwe commander, told the audience “the campaign in 1960 was against the pass laws”. Gunn explained that the day was intended as a “passive resistance campaign” for people to leave their required pass books at home and report to police stations to be arrested. Gunn said that she agreed with sentiments that called for 21 March to be named “Sharpeville Day” to honour the heroes who died not only on that day in 1960, but those who died in the days following the massacre. Marcus Solomons, a former political prisoner and now head of the Children’s Rights Centre, questioned the audience on what it meant to be an activist by saying: “You join because you want to help people. You must be an activist for all your life – that’s what I believe.” Solomons said activists are still needed in communities, especially to fight for the rights of children, especially those within people’s communities. “Let us link up with people in our community,” he said, but warned that those who became activists, whether they were female, male, young or old, needed to “at all times, make sure you are a servant of the people”. Community activist Sharone Daniels from Right2Know spoke about community involvement in projects that would ultimately benefit that community, and to not to let government officials break through bonds among activist organisations through the offering of incentives and jobs. Daniels labelled this as “destabilising”, where activist groups are broken apart when such incentives and jobs are given. “As activists, we need to stick together,” she said. Daniels appealed to the audience to scrutinise parties’ manifestos ahead of the elections, to question politicians on promises and manifestoes — and to “let us make democracy work”. Solomons had the last word by saying communities needed to organise within themselves “dit is belangrik” (it is important) and that while individuals come and go, “organisations remain”. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.