Boeing tumbled the most on the S&P 500 Index on Monday as questions swirled around the newest version of its 737 family, a cash cow that generates almost a third of the company’s operating profit. The Ethiopian disaster followed the crash of a Lion Air 737 Max off the coast of Indonesia in October that killed 189 passengers and crew.  1 Here are the latest developments (time stamps are local time in Hong Kong): The Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore said all Boeing 737 Max flights will be suspended into and out of Singapore after two accidents involving the aircraft in less than five months. The suspension takes effect from 2 p.m. local time on March 12. Mexico’s Grupo Aeromexico SAB became the latest airline to suspend Boeing 737 Max flights. The airline said it would temporarily ground its six Max jets until it has more information about the Ethiopian Airlines disaster. Hours earlier, Aeromexico said it was confident in its Max fleet and the aircraft were in perfect condition. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.