Testifying before the State Capture Commission on Friday, Angelo Agrizzi, Bosasa’s former COO said he had accompanied his former boss, Gavin Watson, to a meeting with Dudu Myeni during which there was a discussion about Bosasa taking over a security tender as well as a catering contract.   3 “She had arranged the meeting for us to meet Nico Bezuidenhout. At the meeting we discussed a security services tender, and to look at Bosasa taking over that and the catering contracts at SAA.”  4 Agrizzi who previously testified about R300,000 in monthly payments allegedly handed to the former SAA chairperson, said he didn’t like the idea of doing business with SAA. He told Watson he didn’t see money in the deals. “Funny enough, he agreed.” But the real reason, he told the Commission, was that he wanted to stay as far away as possible from SAA, Myeni and the Jacob Zuma Foundation which she chairs. Myeni, he previously testified, was the recipient of a Louis Vuitton handbag courtesy of Bosasa, stuffed with R300,000 in cash.   2 Agrizzi reconfirmed that his understanding of the R300,000 payments to Myeni was for “onward” payment to the Jacob Zuma Foundation. “I found this strange because why would the foundation take cash?” Following his initial testimony in January, Agrizzi said he saw Myeni on television, in an interview with eNCA, saying she had only ever visited Bosasa once – when she accompanied former President Jacob Zuma on a tour of the company’s facilities.   2 “This is not true, there were meetings held on a few occasions,” said Agrizzi. He then told the Commission that in addition to the SAA-linked meeting, and another at the Pretoria Sheraton Hotel where she allegedly slipped him confidential Hawks and NPA documents relating to a criminal investigation into the company, he had met her a different time to discuss a “fracking” transaction.  11 His last encounter was in August 2016 shortly after he resigned from Bosasa.  3 He was travelling from Johannesburg to Durban with his wife and once he was seated in a window seat on row two, Myeni allegedly also arrived on the plane. She sat directly in front of him. “She turned around and greeted us.” Agrizzi said he was suspicious about her having been on the plane because of her ties to Watson as he had just resigned and implied that he had tried to avoid her as a result.  1 “I was aloof with her,” he said.   3 “Then, straight out she asked me, ‘what’s wrong with you’?”  3 He said Myeni didn’t know he had resigned. Myeni, one of Zuma’s powerful allies, may well bring an application to cross examine Agrizzi in the future – but whether she will be prepared to subject herself to interrogation by the Commission’s own legal team, a condition for cross examination by implicated parties, remains to be seen.  12 Agrizzi’s testimony continues. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.  1