With 25 percent of the votes counted as of 8pm (17:00 GMT),  an AK Party-led alliance had secured 48.1 percent of the votes countrywide, a ccording to state-run Anadolu Agency. It was followed by a coalition led by the main opposition centre-left Republican People’s Party, with 29.5 of the votes. The polls were seen as a major challenge for Erdogan and his party given a backdrop of high inflation and rising unemployment sparked by a major currency crisis last year. The AK Party entered the race with its ally in the last two polls, the far-right Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), under the People’s Alliance. For its part, CHP joined forces with the right-wing Good (IYI) Party in the Nation Alliance. 190327190617999 Both blocs have fielded dozens of joint candidates in the country’s provinces, districts and towns. With 11 percent of the votes counted In Istanbul, the country’s largest city and economic centre, Binali Yildirim, the candidate of Erdogan’s People’s Alliance and a former prime minister, was in the lead with 51.4 percent of the votes. Ekrem Imamoglu, the Nation Alliance candidate, had 46 percent. In the capital, Ankara, preliminary results showed that the People’s Alliance nominee Mehmet Ozhaseki had garnered 50 percent, followed by Nation Alliance’s Mansur Yavas, with 47 percent. In the third largest city, Izmir, the Nation Alliance candidate Mustafa Tunc Soyer was in the lead with 58 percent of the votes. Nihat Zeybekci, the candidate of Erdogan’s bloc, had 37 percent. The polls took place against the backdrop of last year’s currency crisis and just weeks after official statistics showed that in the last two quarters of 2018 the Turkish economy slipped into its first recession in a decade, as inflation and interest rates soared due to the currency meltdown. In February, inflation stood at just under 20 percent, while the Central Bank’s main interest rate is currently 24 percent.   Different strategies In the lead-up to Sunday’s vote , the People’s Alliance sought to link the local polls to internal and external risks threatening the country’s security. Erdogan has often blamed foreign powers and “speculators” for the currency fluctuations and other economic woes faced by  Turkey  – a message he repeated this week. For its part, the main opposition alliance has focused its campaign on the economic situation and its effect on citizens. It also used Turkish flags in their campaigns, rather than party banners, in an apparent bid to attract voters from different backgrounds. 190330150248508 Ayse Kara, a 40-year-old voter in Istanbul, said she cast her ballot taking into account the stability of the country. “I considered the economy and terror as the main issues while casting my vote. I believe everything will get more stable after the elections,” Kara, who works in manufacturing, told Al Jazeera. Ilke Beltinge, a 25 year-old student, said she did not like the country’s current direction. “I cast my vote for more freedoms, a better economy and a better educational system. And I hope that we will see change following these polls,” she told Al Jazeera at an Istanbul polling station. Two people were killed in the eastern province of Malatya, and dozens of others were wounded in various provinces of Turkey in fights broke out in the voting process, state media reported.DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.