National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) spokesperson Phindi Mjonondwane said the State was happy with the judgment. “We are happy that the court ruled that the evidence of the [six] State witnesses cannot be ignored, and also glad that it has been ruled that Mr Zuma has a case to answer,” said Mjonondwane. The trial is set down for three days, starting on May 15, and Zuma may take the witness stand to share his account of events. Zuma, former president Jacob Zuma’s son, made his application on Wednesday, arguing that there wasn’t sufficient evidence against him. Zuma is on trial for reckless driving, which allegedly led to the death of Phumzile Dube in February 2014, after his car crashed into a taxi in which she was travelling. He claims that his Porsche 911 Turbo hit a puddle of water, lost control and crashed into the taxi. In handing down his judgment, Magistrate Tebogo Thupaatlase said there was sufficient evidence which may lead to a successful prosecution, and Zuma’s claim that there was no evidence against him was not true. Outside court, Black First Land First (BLF) deputy president Zanele Lwana said the court order was a continuation of a plot against the former president, Jacob Zuma, through his son. “The fact that a life was lost should not mean that people should mobilise against the former president through dubious ways.” She has, however, said that her party supports Zuma to stand trial and defend himself, saying he should go tell his side of the story so as to put an end to the allegations.  1 “Duduzane should not be shaken, he must go to court and answer what will be asked of him. He should not lose hope, it was an accident and he did not wake up [that day intending] to kill anyone,” said Lwana. As friendly as ever, Zuma walked out of court greeting journalists and security officials, before climbing into a presidential, protected BMW X5, which his father was in. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.