“It’s now near Sutherland on the south-west part,” Reynold “Rey T” Thakhuli, SANParks general manager for media, PR and stakeholder relations, told News24. The male lion, estimated to be between two and four years old, went missing on February 15, and ranger and tracker teams have been working shifts to track it down. Sutherland is situated in the Northern Cape, about 300km from the Karoo National Park. “The lion is about 42km from Sutherland. This lion is misbehaving; it’s becoming a tourist,” said Thakhuli. Following the kill of an eland two weeks ago, the lion has now taken down a number of sheep, Thakhuli added. “After the eland there was one sheep, and now four sheep in this latest massacre. He must have been hungry.” Bidvest Protea Coin recently assisted the search effort by providing its high-tech helicopter equipped with forward-looking infrared cameras. A four-person team was deployed for three days, but failed to find the predator. SANParks also has its own helicopter on standby. Thakhuli said that it was too early to report on the cost of the operation. “We didn’t really quantify it, because it’s three days. The search is obviously costing us money – we can’t say how much at the moment.” He expressed hope that the team was close to finding the lion, as tracks became visible after fresh rains. “They are following new tracks now, because it has rained in the area and there is new spoor,” said Thakhuli. “When I get updates from the park, I hope every time that this will be the day that we find the lion.” The last lion to hold the record for the longest disappearance was 4-year-old Sylvester in 2016. He managed to evade capture for two weeks. “These young lions are full and energy,” said Thakhuli. “It’s really tough for us, but we will find it.” DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.