“We are elected by the people and therefore what is there is the will of the people,” she told SABC correspondent Sherwin Bryce-Pease.  4 He had asked Dlamini, also the Minister of Women in the Presidency, to respond to her inclusion given criticism on her performance in government. Dlamini was attending the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women in New York. She seemed unfazed by the question. “I want to congratulate every woman who made it to the top 10 because I know it is not easy,” she told Bryce-Pease. She said women were capable and “implementers”. “Most of the time, when men find all sorts of ways of removing women and being ruthless, it is because they see capacity.”  1 She urged all female voters to carefully scrutinise the manifestos of all political parties. She said the ANC’s manifesto came from different structures and sectors of society. News24 earlier reported that only three women made the top 10 on the party’s national list. Top of the list are president Cyril Ramaphosa, Deputy President David Mabuza and party chairperson Gwede Mantashe. Also on the list are Ronald Lamola, Fikile Mbalula, Zweli Mkhize and Bheki Cele. The three women who made it into the top 10 are Nomvula Mokonyane, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and Lindiwe Sisulu.  1 The ANC defended its decision to include members who have been implicated in alleged corruption. ANC secretary general Ace Magashule defended Malusi Gigaba, Nomvula Mokonyane, Bathabile Dlamini and Mosebenzi Zwane, saying they had done nothing wrong. Magashule said the party looked at what the law said and emphasised that none of the members was facing any criminal charges for any offences. The Constitutional Court slammed Dlamini last year for her handling of the social grants debacle in which the livelihoods of millions of people were threatened. The court said she was “reckless” and “grossly negligent” and instructed the National Prosecuting Authority to consider perjury charges against her for lying under oath. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.