Fin24 reported on Saturday that the storm damaged a Mozambican transmission line to South Africa, cutting supplies by 900 MW and worsening already strained electricity supply in South Africa. Speaking to EWN during a campaign trail in the North West on Sunday, the president said the disruptions were happening at a time when Eskom was experiencing challenges. He apologised to South Africans for the crisis, which has led to an increase in load shedding.  2 Ramaphosa added that he was certain that the crisis would be attended to within the next two to three days because the SANDF was also assisting Eskom with the pylons. “But I am certain that we are going to be able to turn it around within the next two days because our defence force is already there helping with rescue operations, but we’ve already asked them to go and see how we can get the pylons to also be restored,” he said.  1 Also on Daily Maverick 'We want the rand to fall so that when it rises, we will control the economy' - Maine The thinking woman’s guide to the 2014 elections The cyclone death toll is higher than 140 while hundreds of people are missing and tens of thousands are stranded as they remain cut off from roads and telephones. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Related 'We want the rand to fall so that when it rises, we will control the economy' - Maine The thinking woman’s guide to the 2014 elections SA police ordered to explain 5-year delay in Rwandan dissident's murder probe Newsflash: Eskom’s Brian Molefe must pay back the money ANC's Malema dilemma: Damned if they don't do it right ANC's 106th: Ramaphosa's speech – low bar, high expectations Explore Daily Maverick The 'vile and venom' of Moyane vs Gordhan meets Zondo The Boeing 737 MAX : a cocktail of a devil in the system, uber-pilots and negotiable safety Meandos aside, Duduzane and Jonas agree on  three key facts Don’t 'Over-Zumanise' State Capture; it’s much deeper – Mcebisi Jonas Healing illegally: The journey of medical cannabis We learnt from Vietnam in the past – so why not now?