Mgobozi confirmed his axing to News24 on Monday, saying he was informed of the decision last week through a letter sent to him by municipal manager Moeketsi Mosola. In the letter, which News24 has seen, Mosola tells the former mayoral spokesperson that there was no other “option”, as his appointment was at odds with legislation and a collective agreement. “In essence, the Auditor-General (AG) has found that your appointment was irregular and that the payment of your salary constitutes irregular expenditure,” explained Mosola to Mgobozi. Mgobozi’s appointment had previously been flagged as one of at least three questionable ones made by former Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga, who argued that there was nothing wrong with the selections as they were political appointments. The former spokesperson also believed he was targeted in an ongoing purge by Mosola of people who once worked with Msimanga. “Effectively this is a continued fight against the former mayor,” remarked Mgobozi when called for comment. The former spokesperson said he had not seen the AG’s report and would ask to be given a copy to see how the findings related to his position. Mosola and Msimanga had been at odds over the irregularly appointed multibillion-rand GladAfrica contract, with the latter failing to suspend the municipal manager several times in the city’s council. Current Tshwane Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa, who took over the reins from Msimanga in February, has sided with the municipal manager in the matter.  2 “An audit was done to say who in my office has what credentials, and it was found his did not meet those required for the job, so his appointment was irregular,” said Mokgalapa. He dismissed Mgobozi’s theory of a “purge”. “There’s no greater purge, you reported on this issue … I’ve just dealt with an irregular contract. I cannot have irregular appointments in my office,” he said. Last week Mokgalapa terminated the City’s contract with GladAfrica, following months of calls to do so from members of the opposition. Mosola, who fought attempts to be removed by Msimanga at every turn, insisting the tender was regular, eventually conceded to it being irregular following the AG’s findings on the issue. The AG’s report showed that R317m already paid to the built environment consultancy firm in a R12bn tender was not above board. Meanwhile, Mgobozi has already started exploring the legal route. He has written to Mosola’s office through his lawyer, requesting reasons for his dismissal. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.