It is expected that the two proclamations will be gazzetted and published on March 29, so that the investigations can kick off.  4 Presidency spokesperson Khusela Diko confirmed Ramaphosa’s authorisation of a probe into the NHLS.  4 Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba welcomed Ramaphosa’s decision to institute a probe into the procurement of what was known as “the red fleet” from contractor Fire Raiders, in a tender that he said was worth R86m at the time. He said the tender was issued in 2014 and was the former “ANC administration’s decision”.  3 Mashaba said his administration had cancelled the contract in 2017, “after it was discovered that the tender was awarded on the basis of forged Bid Evaluation Committee documents”. In 2017, Mashaba said Fire Raiders failed to deliver 29 fire engines and was subsequently placed under business rescue, TimesLive reported at the time. Maladministration, unlawful conduct and loss of public money The Presidency says the SIU will investigate “allegations of maladministration, improper or unlawful conduct and intentional or negligent loss of public money”. The NHLS is the largest diagnostic pathology service in South Africa, with the responsibility of supporting the national and provincial health departments in the delivery of healthcare.  2 “The allegations of wrongdoing pertain to the period between July 1, 2015, and the present. In a proclamation in terms of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act of 1996 (Act 74 of 1996), the president has directed that allegations be investigated and that civil proceedings emanating from such investigation be adjudicated upon,” said Diko.  2 “The SIU investigation will cover the provision of end-user computer hardware and related maintenance and support services for a period of three years in terms of Tender RFB 027/15-16,” continued Diko.  4 The specialised unit will also seek to uncover if there were irregularities in the replacement of water, sewer and drainage pipes. “Any unlawful or improper conduct by the employees or officials of the NHLS or applicable service providers will be examined by the SIU,” Diko said. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.