Songwriters celebrated last year when the Copyright Royalty Board ruled that they will get at least a 15.1 percent share of streaming revenues over the next five years, a raise from the previous rate of 10.5 percent. The bump, which came in January 2018, was the biggest ever, the National Music Publishers Association said at the time. But music-streaming services, most of which are either lose money or only eke out a small profit, warned the change would make it harder to operate. They also complain that the ruling was made without enough input from them. The board’s decision “raises serious procedural and substantive concerns,” Spotify, Amazon.com Inc., Alphabet Inc.’s Google and Sirius XM Holdings Inc.’s Pandora said in a statement. “If left to stand, the CRB’s decision harms both music licensees and copyright owners.” Songwriters have long complained they receive too small a share of sales from streaming, which now accounts for 75 percent of the business in the U.S. — the world’s largest music market. The rates under discussion in this case govern payments from on-demand services such as Spotify and Apple Music, which make up the vast majority of streaming sales. The technology companies waited until the last day to appeal the decision, undermining their recent efforts to court songwriters, said David Israelite, chief executive officer of the NMPA. “I’m sure it was their strategy of how best to screw over songwriters,” Israelite said. “It pulls away the disguise of being friendly.”  3 Israelite said Apple is the one tech heavyweight that didn’t appeal the case. A spokesman for Apple didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.