THE KIMPTON MASON & ROOK The hipsters’ home away from home The Kimpton Mason & Rook is a quiet ambivalence: It is part of the dozens Kimpton boutique hotels and restaurants (the first was launched in San Francisco, California) across the US, boasting an impressive 178 rooms and 18 suites; yet, it rises against the trees, looking every inch like a small contemporary apartment block, stretching its rooms away from the street and the passers-by. The hotel is right in the middle of Washington DC, steps away from 14th Street Northwest, a long stretch of busy and hip restaurants and smaller boutiques; still, pass the hotel’s entrance doors and the place turns into a retreat, a stark contrast with Capitol Hill’s current political drama. Built on the foundation of an old residence, the hotel looks verbatim like someone’s stylish home: comfortable and elegant, warm and inviting, complete with snug sofas, carefully selected artworks and rows of bookshelves. The lobby’s interior is an opus of warm tones and elegant fabrics — velvet, leather, light varnished woods. The rooms have character, and draw on the same textures and hues, adding en-suite bathrooms decorated in marble and charcoal wallpaper, large TV screens and enough space to throw a small party. The effect: you’ll want to extend your stay forever. And since there’s a whole food store that sells home-made peanut butter on tap just two streets away, you might as well unpack your bag (the rooms are small, but practical cupboards will come in handy) and get your mail transferred to 1430 Rhode Island Avenue, Northwest. Price: From R2,600 a night Located: 1430 Rhode Island Avenue, Northwest PI PIZZERIA Geometry for the hungry Pi Pizzeria has two locations in the US, one in DC Metro, the other in St Louis, Missouri. Of course, we could tell you about the pizzeria’s speciality, the cornmeal thin crust, or their whole-wheat option for a healthier feel; we could arouse your taste buds with the Cubano, and the — as per the menu’s description — “slow-cooked pork shoulder, country ham, kosher pickle, yellow mustard and flat-leaf parsley.” And if that’s not enough to convince you to give the place a go, maybe President Obama will. In 2008, Barack Obama had a slice of Pi Pizzeria during a campaign stop in St Louis. A few hours later, he called the team at Pi to tell them that it was “the best pizza he’d ever had”. A year later, owner and chef behind Pi, Cary McDowell, was invited to the White House to cook for the First Family; QED. You might have to queue to get a table as the place is constantly busy; if that is the case, don’t hesitate to ask them for a seat at the bar: You’ll have a prime position on their crafted beers and you’ll be served quite quickly. http://pi-pizza.com Located: 910 F Street NW COMET PING PONG PIZZERIA The other political pizzeria The good thing is, if you feel that a wood-fired pizza won’t do any good to your fitness levels, then a crusty pie paired with a game of ping pong might save the night. Comet Ping Pong Pizzeria has table tennis tables and punk rock shows all set in a joint with concrete walls and simple wooden benches. It’s the perfect place for a first date, a friend’s birthday bash or a family gathering. Yet, in 2016, Comet became caught in a hail storm of conspiracy theory dubbed #PizzaGate, dragging the pizza joint into a pseudo-sex-ring scandal following the leak of John Podesta’s emails (Podesta was Clinton’s campaign manager). At the time, Hillary Clinton was still a contestant in the run for presidency (and a great, possibly saner winner) and Trump was… Trump. In an interview with the New York Times, Comet Ping Pong owner James Alefantis, once referred to the conspiracy theory and the violent attacks that followed, including a shooting at his restaurant, as “an insanely complicated, made-up, fictional lie-based story” and a “coordinated political attack”. #PizzaGate eventually fizzled out, Comet Ping Pong is thankfully still standing and you’d miss out by not paying it a visit and a game of ping pong. https://www.cometpingpong.com Located: 5037 Connecticut Avenue CALL YOUR MOTHER DELI The best bagel in town (literally) Call Your Mother is worth every step you’ll make in its direction. This Jew-ish deli restaurant is the brainchild of Jeff Zients (aka “Mr Fix-It” – during President Barack Obama’s time in the White House, Zients was tasked with fixing the Healthcare.org issues, also known as website crashes) and the food love affair between founder and chief dough boy and Argentinian chef, Daniela Moreira. The deli is open for breakfast and lunch with one king item on the menu: Wood-fired bagels, divided into a multitude of combinations. Bagels with sesame seeds, Za’atar, or “everything”, bagels-turned-sandwich, plain with a cup of coffee and latkes, or made into a pizza. Here, the bagel reigns supreme and we all kneel at its crusty sesame seeds and smoked flavour. Although you will come back for the food (and leave with a paper bag full of extra bagels just in case), you won’t be indifferent to the charm of the place: It has pink walls with pops of light sea green, bright yellow wooden chairs, and Call-Your-Mother coffee cups that might soon be a parental must-have. https://www.callyourmotherdeli.com/ Located: 3301 Georgia Ave KRAMMERBOOKS & AFTERWORD CAFE The inner circle Kramerbooks & Afterwords is an independent bookstore and café, founded in 1976 by Bill Kramer, Henry Posner, and David Tenney. That the place managed to stay independent and relevant despite the rise of digital is already an achievement, but Kramerbooks is not just a bookstore: It’s an institution and a ritual (as a proof, this journalist pays a visit to the store every time she travels to DC, filling her bag with more books than the airline will allow her to carry). It has attracted many influential residents, from Andy Warhol to Barack Obama. But it is Monica Lewinsky who brought sudden (and unwanted) attention to the book shop. In 1998, special counsel and prosecutor Kenneth Starr subpoenaed Kramerbooks to disclose which books Monica Lewinsky had purchased — a subpoena Bill Kramer fought, despite sales dropping and some customers sending angry messages. Respect. https://kramers.com Located: 1517 Connecticut Avenue, Dupont Circle. ML 032_Lobby 3_7239.jpg     Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.