Malek, 37, drew critical acclaim for his portrayal of Queen front man Freddie Mercury in last year’s “Bohemian Rhapsody.” “I promise you all I will be making sure that Mr. Bond does not have an easy ride of it,” Malek said in a recorded announcement from New York aired as part of a webcast about the new movie. In an interview, Malek promised a different type of villain than Bond fans have come to expect. The film will take “the perspective of what it means to be a villain, and perhaps flipping that on its head in some way, shape or form,” he said. The still untitled movie known by the working title “Bond 25” will be Craig’s fifth go-around as Britain’s most famous fictional secret agent, and will feature on-location scenes in Jamaica, the producers said in the webcast from the Caribbean island. After 2015 film “Spectre,” Craig had said he would rather slash his wrists than play Bond again. But in 2017, the actor confirmed he would return to the role one last time. “A break was what I needed,” Craig told Reuters on Thursday in Jamaica, where some of the cast members are filming. “I’m incredibly excited just to get going.” Actors who will reprise their roles alongside Craig include Ralph Fiennes as M, Naomie Harris as Moneypenny and Ben Whishaw as Q. Joining the cast are Jeffrey Wright, Billy Magnussen and Dali Benssalah. Producers had already announced that the movie, set for release next April, will be directed by Cary Joji Fukunaga, the man behind the first season of the U.S. television drama “True Detective.” Among trademarks of Bond movies are their exotic locations, beginning with Jamaica when the franchise was launched with “Dr. No” in 1962. “We consider Jamaica Bond’s spiritual home,” said producer Barbara Broccoli. The new film will be shot in Italy, Norway and London in addition to Jamaica, the producers said. The Bond franchise, based on the Ian Fleming novels about the British secret agent who outsmarts international villains, overcomes certain death and charms glamorous women, first hit screens during the Cold War with Sean Connery as Bond. Bond has also been played by George Lazenby, Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton and Pierce Brosnan. (Reporting by Alicia Powell in Ocho Rios, Jamaica and Peter Szekely in New York; editing by Jonathan Oatis and James Dalgleish) DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.