While on stage to promote her new film “The Good Liar” at the CinemaCon conference in Las Vegas, Mirren said, “I love Netflix, but f— Netflix. There’s nothing like sitting in a cinema.” The remarks underscore tensions between Hollywood traditionalists and streaming platforms like Netflix. After the company’s “Roma” almost won an Academy Award for best picture, it’s come under fire for undermining the movie industry’s longstanding practices. Steven Spielberg, who won a best-picture award for “Schindler’s List,” has reportedly pushed for changes at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences. He has said that streaming movies shouldn’t be considered for Oscars unless they have a traditional run in theaters. As one of the three Academy governors of the directors branch, Spielberg helps set policy for the organization. The U.S. Justice Department also has weighed in on the issue. It warned the Academy that if potential rule changes hurt Netflix, they may violate laws meant to protect competition, according to a person familiar with the matter. Makan Delrahim, head of the agency’s antitrust division, sent a letter to Academy Chief Executive Officer Dawn Hudson on March 21, expressing concern about the way new award rules might be written, the person said. Mirren, 73, was speaking to a friendly audience: CinemaCon is a convention for theater owners. Last year, some major movie chains refused to exhibit Netflix’s films — and wouldn’t even show “Roma’’ after it received the most Oscar nominations of any picture. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.