A new unit will develop interactive programming and live specials under Ben Relles, who had been overseeing unscripted programs, the Google-owned company said Tuesday. Relles, who has worked at YouTube for eight years, just started in the role and is still exploring the best ways for YouTube viewers to participate in stories. Producers have tried for years to tell stories that let viewers pick different outcomes, but only recently has the technology advanced enough to entice large investments from some of the world’s top media companies. “We now have amazing new tools and opportunities to create and tell multilayered and interactive stories,” Susanne Daniels, YouTube’s head of original programming, said in a statement. “Ben has an intuitive and experienced understanding of how the platform can enhance content, making him the perfect choice to develop this exciting new division.” Competition Looms
Netflix Inc. has developed a handful of interactive shows for kids, and last December released “Black Mirror: Bandersnatch,” its first interactive program for adults. The company is now working on a larger slate. Last year, Walmart Inc. invested $250 million in a joint venture with Eko, which produces interactive series.  1 Chooseco LLC, a publisher of books for children, owns the trademark to “Choose Your Own Adventure, and has sued Netflix, seeking $25 million in damages. Netflix has asked the judge to dismiss the case, arguing that, “The idea of a narrative storytelling device in which readers or viewers make their own choices is not protected by trademark law.” YouTube has already experimented with interactive advertisements. But interactive programming — with multiple storylines — requires a far larger investment to ensure choices load without buffering. Netflix has built technology that remembers the choices users make over the course of a story. YouTube is restructuring its programming staff as part of a new strategy. The company has scaled back its ambitions in original scripted shows in favor of lower-cost reality fare and live events. But YouTube, a division of Alphabet Inc.’s Google, isn’t giving up on original programming all together. The company will announce a new slate at an event in New York in a few weeks, and has continued buying projects from producers. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.