It would be a fundamental change to the domestic cricket landscape in South Africa and would effectively be the death of the franchise system. CSA CEO Thabang Moroe confirmed this past weekend that CSA’s revised losses sit at  R350 millio n  for the last four years and that the proposed restructure was part of the solution to turn the tide in the next four years. While the plans have been approved at board level, CSA must now consult with the franchises as well as well as the South African Cricketers Association (SACA) before anything can start moving forward. “We have a three-phased process where we will see Cricket South Africa go back to 12 provinces and we plan in the third year to either have Limpopo, Mpumalanga – or both – become part of the first-class structure, which will take us to the 14-member competition,” said Moroe. “Franchise cricket has been a huge burden to CSA’s coffers. “We are pinning most of our work and commercial strategy on the Mzansi Super League to be the program that is actually going to fund domestic cricket.” The thinking is that the new 12-team system would give more playing opportunities to more players in South Africa. General manager cricket of CSA Corrie van Zyl  further announced the termination of the T20 Challenge , which is currently ongoing. “Obviously with us collapsing the franchise system into the senior provincial system, you will have lesser competition costs associated with the competitions,” said Van Zyl. “Next year, we’ll already be saving because of the termination of the T20 Challenge. From May 2020, we’ll be moving to a 12-affiliate first-class structure, which enables us to have a saving. “From a cricket perspective, the strength versus strength was very important. In our plan we will structure the new competition in such a way that we have strength versus strength, eventually getting to an A and B section at first-class level,” said Van Zyl. The six franchises currently playing in the top-tier of domestic cricket are the Cape Cobras, Warriors, Dolphins, Knights, Highveld Lions and Titans. The 14 semi-professional provinces include Western Province, Boland, South Western Districts, Eastern Province, Border, KwaZulu-Natal, KwaZulu-Natal Inland, Free State, Northern Cape, Gauteng, Northerns, Easterns, North West and Mpumalanga. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.