“When Vice President Mike Pence asked me what I’d do with Mr. Assange, I said that that would be a sovereign decision of the people of Ecuador,” Moreno said at an event hosted by think tank The Inter-American Dialogue during a visit to Washington on Tuesday. Assange’s arrest last week ended a nearly seven-year standoff between the transparency advocate and British authorities. The Australian initially faces punishment for jumping bail, but he could prolong a battle over attempts to extradite him to the U.S. The 47-year-old had been in the building since 2012, when he entered to escape questioning in a Swedish sexual-assault case. That probe was dropped, but he remained in a small apartment in the embassy. From his refuge, Assange ran a team of computer hackers seeking information of interest to him and his financial backers, Moreno said. Ola Bini, a Swedish software developer arrested last week at Quito’s international airport, is suspected to have been among them, Moreno added. Bini’s father earlier Tuesday denied any wrongdoing by his son. Bini’s lawyer, Carlos Soria, said that he had worked in Ecuador to safeguard websites from hacking and that his rights to due process were violated with his arrest. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.