The House Judiciary Committee plans to hold votes on Wednesday to authorize the subpoenas, the panel said Monday in a news release. Three days earlier, Attorney General William Barr said he would provide Congress with a redacted version of Mueller’s report on his investigation into Trump and Russian election meddling by mid-April. “Congress requires the full and complete Special Counsel report, without redactions, as well as access to the underlying evidence,” Judiciary Chairman Jerrold Nadler said in an emailed statement Monday. “Attorney General Barr has thus far indicated he will not meet the April 2 deadline set by myself and five other Committee chairs, and refused to work with us to provide the full report, without redactions, to Congress. The Attorney General should reconsider so that we can work together to ensure the maximum transparency of this important report to both Congress and the American people.” The Judiciary Committee said it also plans to authorize subpoenas for certain documents from former White House Counsel Don McGahn, former White House strategist Steve Bannon, former communications director Hope Hicks, former Chief of Staff Reince Priebus and former White House aide Ann Donaldson. Read more: Who’s Looking at What in the Investigations of Trump The committee said these individuals or their lawyers may have received documents from the White House relevant to Mueller’s investigation and that would waive any right to cite executive privilege or other claims from being used to block requests for documents. “Several weeks ago, I sent document requests to 81 individuals and entities as part of the House Judiciary Committee investigation into abuse of power, corruption and obstruction of justice by the President,” Nadler said in the statement. “Regrettably, not everyone has chosen to voluntarily cooperate with the Committee at this time. I am particularly concerned about reports that documents relevant to the Special Counsel investigation were sent outside the White House, waiving applicable privileges. “To this end, I have asked the Committee to authorize me to issue subpoenas, if necessary, to compel the production of documents and testimony,” Nadler said. Read more: Barr Hints at Wider Release of Mueller Report as Democrats Fume Nadler had earlier demanded that the White House turn over Mueller’s full report by Tuesday. Barr revealed in a letter Friday to Nadler that Mueller’s report is almost 400 pages, not including tables and exhibits. Nadler says the House wants the full report and its attachments. Barr told lawmakers that sensitive material such as grand jury evidence will be stripped out of the version he sends to Congress. But he suggested that he wouldn’t remove information just because it’s critical of Trump or senior figures in his 2016 campaign. Barr released a four-page summary of the report on March 24, saying that Mueller didn’t establish that Trump or anyone associated with his campaign conspired or coordinated with Russia. But Mueller didn’t exonerate Trump on the question of whether he obstructed the investigation, according to Barr’s summary. Congressional Democrats have criticized that brief summation as inadequate. The committee cited historical precedent for making the requests for Mueller’s entire report, pointing to the supplying to the panel of the Watergate special prosecutor’s 55-page grand jury road map in 1974 and Ken Starr’s 455-page report along with 18 boxes of evidence in 1998. In addition, the committee said that in 2018 the Justice Department provided more than 800,000 pages of internal investigative records to Congress regarding the probe into former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s use of private email to and highly sensitive material including previously classified information regarding the federal investigation that led to the Mueller probe. Trump tweeted about the Mueller probe on Monday. “Now that the long awaited Mueller Report conclusions have been released, most Democrats and others have gone back to the pre-Witch Hunt phase of their lives before Collusion Delusion took over. Others are pretending that their former hero, Bob Mueller, no longer exists!” he wrote. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.