Plans for an industry-funded regulator, which would enforce rules on removing online content that encourages terrorism and child sexual exploitation and abuse, are part of a push by Prime Minister Theresa May’s government to hold the companies accountable. Enforcement powers could include blocking access to sites and imposing liability on individual company managers.  2 The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport laid out the proposals as it opened a 12-week consultation on the measures on Monday. “Online companies must start taking responsibility for their platforms, and help restore public trust in this technology,” May said. “For too long these companies have not done enough to protect users, especially children and young people, from harmful content.”  2 The plans weren’t universally welcomed. The Institute of Economic Affairs, a pro-market research group, labeled them “draconian” and more likely to do harm than good by holding back innovation. Giving the government power to dictate what content is appropriate sets a dangerous precedent, Director General Mark Littlewood said.  1 Mosque Shootings
The proposed laws will apply to any company that allows users to share or find user-generated content or interact with each other online, such as social-media platforms, file hosting sites, public discussion forums, messaging services and search engines. Other proposals outlined by the government include: Ensuring companies respond to user complaints and act on them quickly Codes of practice which could include requirements to minimize the spread of misleading or harmful disinformation with fact checkers, particularly during elections Annual transparency reports on harmful content and companies’ action to address it A framework to help companies incorporate safety features in new products A strategy to educate users on how to recognize and deal with malicious behavior online
Damian Collins, a Conservative who chairs the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee, cited the terrorist attack in New Zealand in which 50 Muslims were killed while video of the assault was live-streamed online. “A regulator should have the power to investigate how content of that atrocity was shared and why more was not done to stop it sooner,” he said. DM  2 Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.