Yujing Zhang appeared in West Palm Beach court, after having been arrested March 30 for illegally entering Trump’s resort and lying to a Secret Service agent. She may be formally indicted as early as this week, prosecutors said. Zhang’s possession of two passports, four cell phones and a USB drive that allegedly contained malware, raised concerns about security at Trump’s “winter White House” and whether foreign governments are attempting to infiltrate the property to gain information. Congressional Democrats asked the FBI to evaluate the national-security risks at Mar-a-Lago following Zhang’s arrest. Trump defended the security measures at Mar-a-Lago last week, calling the Zhang intrusion “a fluke.” He said there are “very good” controls in place. Zhang’s two-hour bail hearing Monday failed to shed much light on whether she tried to get into Mar-a-Lago to collect information, or was just trying to hob nob with South Florida’s elite in the presence of the U.S. president, who was at a golf course near the resort when Zhang was arrested. Prosecutors urged the judge to keep her in custody, saying she’s a flight risk with no ties to the U.S. She “lies to everyone she encounters,” prosecutor Rolando Garcia told the judge. More on Mar-a-Lago security here In addition to the electronics she carried into the resort, Zhang also had a signal detector, five SIM cards and more than $7,600 in U.S. currency in her room at the Colony Palm Beach hotel, about two miles north of Mar-a-Lago, Garcia said. A signal detector is used to detect hidden video or audio-recording devices. Garcia noted that Zhang isn’t facing espionage or related charges at this time, but the government continues to look into that possibility. Zhang entered the courtroom in handcuffs, wearing a navy blue prison-issued jump suit. She took notes during the hearing. Her lawyer, public defender Robert Adler, said there were innocent explanations for many of the allegations, including having two passports. Zhang’s valid U.S. visa was stamped in an expired passport, which she needed to carry in addition to her valid passport, Adler said. She also showed all the electronics she carried when entering the resort, including when she went through a metal detector, Adler said. And he questioned the Secret Service’s allegation that the USB drive was infected with malware. Secret Service agent Samuel Ivanovich testified Monday that another agent put the USB drive into his computer and it immediately began to install files. The agent shut down the computer to prevent a possible infection, but Ivanovich couldn’t identify the malware. The device is still being analyzed, Ivanovich said. Adler also told the judge the Secret Service interviewed Zhang for more than two hours at Mar-a-Lago and two more at a Secret Service facility before providing her with a Mandarin translator. In court documents, Ivanovich said Zhang appeared to comprehend English well. Zhang made her way into Mar-a-Lago, first by claiming she wanted to go to the pool, and then that she was attending a social event, according to court documents. A receptionist tipped off the Secret Service because no social events were scheduled that day. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.