Following hot on the heels of the Franschhoek Literary Festival (FLF), the Kingsmead Book Fair (KBF), now in its eighth year, takes place in Johannesburg on Saturday, 25 May. In addition to the main programme, the KBF has a Children’s Programme and a Teen Programme, and its setting – all events happen on the Kingsmead school campus – makes it very family-friendly indeed. Books will be on sale throughout the day, and there is a fine selection of food and drink to keep your energy levels up/down/sideways. Heck, the fair even launched its own mobile app this year. You really can have it all! Below, find five picks from us on how to spend your hard-earned ticket money. But first, a quick Author Watch™. Fans of local fiction are in for a treat, as esteemed writers visiting the festival this year include Imraan Coovadia (A Spy In Time), Amy Heydenrych (Shame on You), Ekow Duker (Yellowbone), Mike Nicol (Sleeper), Masande Ntshanga (Triangulum), Craig Higginson (The Dream House), Mphuthumi Ntabeni (The Broken River Tent) and Sue Nyathi (The Gold Diggers). Plus, Simon Sebag Montefiore makes his way up from Franschhoek, and is joined on the International Writer Watch List™ by acclaimed children’s author Fleur Hitchcock, who will be chatting about her new book, the thrilling, murderous tale The Boy Who Flew. Apart from sticking to the names above like glue, try your very best not to miss these events, too: The Comedy Channel, 9.30am
Hagen Engler (Black Twitter, Blitz and a Boerie as long as your leg), Melusi Tshabalala (Melusi’s Everyday Zulu) and the Daily Maverick’s Rebecca Davis (Self Helpless – A Cynic’s Search for Sanity) and Zapiro (WTF) crack wise. An Ancestry of Activism, 11am
Malebo Sephodi speaks to Lukhanyo Calata (My Father Died For This), Rekgotsofetse Chikane (Breaking a Rainbow, Building a Nation), Tembeka Ngcukaitobi (The Land Is Ours) and Rehana Rossouw (New Times) about South Africa’s intergenerational tradition of protest. More Than A Match, 2.30pm
Luke Alfred (Vuvuzela Dawn), sports blogger Kate Nokwe and Ernest Landheer (A Captain’s Journey) revisit the sporting moments that have shaped our nation from 1994 to the present. Sports reporter Tumi Kgasoe cheers them on. We, The People, 4pm
How can democracy survive in these troubled times? And, most importantly, what can ordinary citizens do to uphold it? Michelle Le Roux (Lawfare), Ferial Haffajee, Jane Duncan (Stopping the Spies) and Steven Friedman (Power in Action: Democracy, Citizenship and Social Justice) discuss with Sithembile Mbete. New Visions, 4pm
Meet some of the contributors to New Daughters of Africa, the international anthology of writing by women of African descent. Fresh, vibrant voices have been gathered together to pay tribute to the heritage that unites them. With Phillippa Yaa De Villiers, Reneilwe Malatji and Yewande Omotoso, and chaired by Contributing Editor of The Johannesburg Review of Books, Efemia Chela. We also like the look of these events, too – check ’em out: Visit The Reading List at readinglist.click for South African book news daily. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.