United sacked Jose Mourinho in December when the club were 11 points adrift of the top four. Solskjaer has been reeling in their rivals but after some poor games recently United are sixth with three games to go, three points behind fourth-placed Chelsea. “It’s been an emotional season for the club because we’ve changed manager halfway through,” Solskjaer told reporters ahead of Chelsea’s visit on Sunday. “We’re still in the race for top four, and the focus has to be on Chelsea. If we get a performance there, which we know we can do, we know they’re tired, we don’t care because there’s three games to go. “You work your socks off for 90 minutes three times, then it’s your holidays.” Solskjaer was unbeaten in his first 12 league games in charge but United have since lost four of their last six matches, handing Arsenal and Chelsea the advantage in the race for the top four. “It’s a challenge, yes, and a difficult period now, but it’s what I expected,” he added. “The Premier League has changed, it’s such an unbelievable league. When I played, it was us and Arsenal. Now there are six teams really fighting or starting in the beginning believing they can challenge for trophies.” Midfielder Paul Pogba has been linked with a move to Real Madrid by British media in recent weeks, but Solskjaer said he believed the France international, who has a contract until 2021, would stay at Old Trafford next season. “You can’t guarantee anything in football but yes, I think Paul is going to be here,” Solskjaer said. “We want him to do well, he’s a leader in that dressing room and on the pitch for us.” Solskjaer also confirmed goalkeeper David De Gea would keep his place against Chelsea despite going a recent rough patch. The Spanish goalkeeper has not kept a clean sheet in his last 12 games in all competitions. “David is fine, of course I’m not going to take him out of the firing line,” Solskjaer said. “I trust David and he’s been the best player United have had in the last six or seven years. He’ll play the next three games.” (Reporting by Rohith Nair in Bengaluru; Editing by Hugh Lawson) DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.