This is a response to Sizwe Mbele’s article: Is Davos a panacea or a pretext for elitism?  1 The world’s government institutions were never built to deal with climate change, the Fourth Industrial Revolution, a multi-polar world or high and rising inequality. No wonder, then, that democracies and capitalism are under threat from the forces of populism. The only wonder is why we should be so surprised to find ourselves in the state we are in. In the 1970s, the Forum’s idea that not just governments and business but also civil society needed to be at the table was hardly universally popular. Nor was our insistence that business bear social as well as shareholder responsibility. In the 1990s, with the global economy embarking on its longest post-War period of growth, our focus had shifted to the as-yet-unseen risks of inequality. A decade later, we were bringing climate change to the top of the agenda followed by the risks posed by automation. The best leaders use this knowledge to prepare for the future. In recent years, CEOs participating at Davos have reduced carbon emissions by millions of tonnes and provided new skills to tens of millions of workers. Making Davos less a safe space for socialising and more an awkward place to engage on issues such as tax or, as Greta Thunberg told leaders in Davos, our house-fire of a climate crisis, will define whether we will ever be able to fix our broken system. DM Oliver Cann, Public Engagement, World Economic Forum. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.