Following the bizarre arrest and imprisonment of Vodacom’s Tanzanian CEO MD Hisham Hendi last week, SA’s cellphone companies are quietly worried that governments outside their home base are abruptly changing investment terms and imposing dubious fines in a desperate attempt to supplement government income. The Nigerian government has in the past imposed massive fines on MTN in disputed circumstances for notional regulatory infractions, and now observers claim this approach appears to be spreading. Yet, they are also determined to comply with local laws and say the jury is still out on whether there is a pattern emerging. The circumstances in which Vodacom’s Tanzanian MD and eight other industry figures were arrested are still vague, but they have been effectively charged with economic sabotage, a crime so serious that no bail is available. Yet, the actual loss claimed by prosecutors is a relatively modest R68-million. According to court documents, they have been charged with unlawfully importing and installing communication equipment and distributing numbers without a licence to do so. The charges claim a “pecuniary loss” to the Government of Tanzania and the Tanzanian Communication Regulatory Authority of more than 11 billion Tanzanian Shillings, about R68-million. Vodacom has responded coolly to the arrest, saying the Tanzanian subsidiary “will continue to co-operate with the investigation and that it upholds the highest standards of business integrity, ethics and good corporate governance”. However, the company has been forced to appoint an emergency acting MD in Jacques Marais. Vodacom Tanzania has assured users — it has about a third of the total market — that it will continue to operate free of interruptions. However, the court case has cleaned out almost the entire c-suite of the Tanzanian business. Those arrested include the head of revenue, Joseph Nderitu, the head of Vodacom Tanzania’s legal service Olaf Mumburi, the head of sales Joseph Muhere and finance manager Ibrahim Bonzo. Others arrested include Le Van Dai, the managing director of Halotel Tanzania, owned by Vietnam-based telecoms operator Viettel, and Sherif El Barbary, managing director of Zantel. All but one of the arrested are foreign nationals; Dai is a Vietnamese citizen, while Barbary is Egyptian. The court documents suggest the suspects were found in illegal possession of close to 3,000 unregistered sim cards. The other suspects are from local operators named Inventure Mobile Tanzania or Tala Tanzania. Local press reports suggest the scheme involved routing international calls through a system which bypassed the local network, which would then also have bypassed international interconnection fees. Vodacom has announced it would also be investigating the case itself and it has not ruled out that there may be a legitimate case to answer. However, the case does arise in the context of a new and tighter regulator context, which may include the mandatory listing of at least 25% of telecoms companies on the local bourse. South African journalist and digital expert Toby Shapshak commented that after the saga in Nigeria with MTN and various fines and accusations, then something similarly bizarre in Ghana, “it does seem like some countries are targeting cellular networks”. “Vodacom and MTN are listed companies with very strict governance rules. It’s hard to imagine a senior executive at a multinational that has numerous governance structures in place attempting something like not paying the right taxes; and certainly not to the tune of nearly US $5-million. “You obviously never know — who does want to pay more taxes — but it does seem highly suspicious, especially after the problems Bharti Airtel had in Tanzania earlier this year (2019,” he said. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.