Protests have taken place in the Happy Valley community since Monday. On Wednesday, police confirmed the arrest of 15 men and two women for allegedly throwing petrol bombs. “Public order police and law enforcement agencies are monitoring the protest that is underway in Happy Valley where a group of 1 000 people are participating in a service delivery protest,” police spokesperson Sergeant Noloyiso Rwexana said. Police would remain on the scene until law and order was restored, Rwexana confirmed. Earlier on Wednesday, the City of Cape Town’s traffic spokesperson Richard Coleman said the protest resulted in road closures. “Two roads in Blackheath are closed and affected roads include Wimbledon Street, which is closed on both sides between Buttskop Road and School Street,” said Coleman. Coleman further said businesses in the area are not accessible and transport services have been affected. Several commuters have been stranded as a result. “MyCity and Golden Arrow buses are not able to leave the depots,” Coleman said. On Monday, iOL reported that the Blackheath Industrial Area came to a standstill when residents blocked roads with burning tyres. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.