Security forces fired tear gas early Monday in a bid to disperse the thousands-strong crowd outside military headquarters in the capital, Khartoum, where the 75-year-old president has one of his homes. At least seven people have been killed since the gathering began Saturday, according to activists. “We are not less than the Algerians — we’ve made sacrifices to maintain our dignity and bring freedom and democracy,” said protester Nasur Ahmed, in reference to recent unrest that forced Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika to resign after 20 years in power. “Al-Bashir and his entire inner circle should step down now.” The sit-in marked the anniversary of a 1985 uprising that led to Sudan’s army overthrowing then-President Gaafar al-Nimeiri. Al-Bashir, who’s ruled since a 1989 coup, is facing almost four months of nationwide protests sparked by soaring living costs that morphed into calls for his resignation. A crackdown by authorities has left more than 45 people dead, according to rights groups. Sudan’s military hasn’t officially commented on the sit-in’s demands. The National Council of Defense and Security met with al-Bashir on Sunday and later called on Sudan’s people to deal with the situation “wisely” to avoid instability. “One people, one army,” protesters chanted outside the army HQ. “The army is with us, so we don’t care.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.