They insisted on being addressed by ward councillor Danny Netnow. Netnow was arrested on Monday during protests in Ennerdale. He was later released on R500 bail. An advisor in the office of City of Johannesburg speaker, Raymond Arends, told the protesters that Netnow wouldn’t be able to address them due to the strict bail conditions imposed on him. “Councillor Netnow was ordered not to participate in any protests and not to address a crowd of people. He won’t be able to come here,” said Arends. Several community leaders and Arends then headed to the municipal offices in Lenasia, where their memorandum was delivered. Resident Xolile Madayi said they wanted toilets, electricity, water, and the removal of trees in their settlement.  2 “The process to install electricity and toilets was not fair because some of us were skipped. We want Netnow to come and address us. If not, we will continue protesting,” he said. Madayi added that he was aware that Netnow had been arrested and called for Mayor Herman Mashaba to address them on behalf of Netnow. Residents said some of the huge trees standing in their yards posed a serious risk, fearing they could fall onto their shacks anytime. They also accused Netnow of prioritising the needs of residents in neighbouring Meriting informal settlement. Police later removed objects that were used to barricade the road. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.