IIlustrative image. Photo: Istinomertt/Flickr Published originally by  GroundUp . Legal Aid South Africa, which provides tax-funded legal aid to the poor, amended its means test on 1 April, enabling more people to qualify for legal assistance. Legal Aid provides independent legal aid services in criminal and civil legal matters. Its means test is determined by the person’s income and the assets that they own. The amendments have substantially changed, accounting for inflation and the rising cost of living. A person’s qualifying monthly earnings, after tax, must not exceed R7,400, a 35% increase from the previous limit. For a member of a household, the household’s monthly income, after tax, must not exceed R8,000, a 34% increase. If the applicant does not own immovable property, the value of their movable assets must not exceed R128,000, a 28% increase. If the applicant is a member of a household and owns immovable property, the value of their immovable and movable assets must not exceed R640,000, a 23% increase. Once the applicant has qualified through the means test, they receive assistance until the matter is finalised. In the 2017/18 financial year, Legal Aid SA provided representation and advice to about 730,000 people, according to its national legal manager, Dick Khubana. In that year, the organisation took on a total of 426,617 new legal matters and finalised a total of 420,061. “While we cannot quantify the exact figures of clients we are now anticipating … Legal Aid SA is well prepared for the increase in applications … We have implemented efficiency measures to ensure that matters are categorised and scheduled in line with the processes required,” said Legal Aid SA spokesperson Victor Mfanafuthi Shabangu. Legal Aid SA last amended its means test in 2012. The service is funded by the government. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.