State radio said Sudan’s army is preparing to make an important announcement as military officers surrounded the presidential palace in Khartoum, the capital. Al-Bashir is under house arrest, and the army will set up a council to administer state affairs, broadcaster Sky Arabia reported. All political prisoners will be freed, the state-run SUNA news agency said. Al-Bashir would be the second leader in the region to quit amid nationwide protests this month, following Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika’s resignation. Calls for al-Bashir to resign reached fever pitch in recent days, as security forces fired tear gas at thousands of protesters gathered outside the military headquarters in Khartoum, where the president has a residence. They urged the army to back their movement. The demonstration was called by the Sudanese Professionals Association to mark the anniversary of the 1985 rebellion that overthrew President Gafaar Nimeiry. The outlawed group includes doctors, engineers and academics, and has played an instrumental role in sustaining the uprising. The army’s latest movements come as Bashir’s embattled ruling National Congress Party canceled a planned “million-man” rally to defend the 75-year-old on Thursday. Gunfire was heard around the army HQ sit-in on Thursday, close to the office of the Islamic Movement, a wing of the NCP. Africa’s third-largest nation has seen uprisings and demonstrations during Bashir’s three decades in charge. But the latest movement, which started in December with an outcry over rising living costs, had posed the biggest threat to his reign since he seized power in a 1989 Islamist-backed coup. His government has acknowledged some economic grievances, but insisted elections in 2020 remain the only path to change. People have protested across Sudan with security forces battling to contain them. Rights groups have said more than 45 people have been killed and 2,600 arrested. In March, the SPA made another bid to weaken al-Bashir, organizing a day-long strike that saw professionals including teachers and doctors stay home from work. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.