The object, dubbed 2019 GF1, is between 8m and 18m long and will come as close as 1.8 million kilometres from the planet, data from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) revealed. For a typical object, it’s travelling relatively slowly at 1.91km/s – about five times the speed of sound – according to JPL.  2 “It’s moving across the sky very slowly because it’s orbiting the Sun at a similar rate to the Earth,” South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO) Science Engagement Astronomer Dr Daniel Cunnama told News24.  1 Even at 18m long, 2019 GF1 is smaller than 2019 GC6 which came very close to Earth on April 9. Asteroid 2019 GC6 was only discovered nine days before its fly-by, reports Space.com, and is a massive 30m wide. It came as close as 219 000km. The Moon averages 380 000km from Earth. Asteroids usually orbit a belt between Mars and Jupiter, as well as beyond Neptune in a region known as the Kuiper Belt. They can be nudged out of orbit by an impact or the gravity of a large object. These objects can then make their way into the inner solar system (between the Sun and Mars) where they are known and near-Earth objects (NEOs). Cunnama remarked that 2019 GF1’s orbit was close to that of Earth. “It looks like it’s on a very big orbit. It’s slightly off the Earth’s orbit.” 2019 GF1 could be classified as an Apollo asteroid because it crosses the Earth’s orbit, according to JPL data. Other classifications include Amors (which orbit outside the Earth’s orbit), and Inner Earth Objects (which orbit between the Earth and the Sun). According to Spaceweather.com, there are about 1 967 potentially hazardous NEOs and scientists continue to discover new ones. The SAAO hosts an Asteroid Terrestrial-Impact Last Alert System (Atlas) instrument in Sutherland to monitor for hazardous asteroids.The instrument is funded by NASA and costs $3.8m. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.