Johannesburg central — the SA Cities Network says metros have a funding gap of between 10% and 38% of their capital expenditure, and unless this funding gap is closed, metros will not be able to meet their core mandates over the medium to long term. (Photo: Babak Fakhamzadeh via Flickr)  Less Releasing their “people’s guide” to their State of City Finances report, the SA Cities Network said the key focus was the impact on consumers of increased electricity and water tariffs, especially in the context of an economic environment of all-round rising costs. Key findings on the challenges facing citizens are: Key findings on challenges facing the metros are: According to the report, metros have three primary means of sourcing income: revenue they generate independently through sources like taxes and services provided; the local government equitable share, which is a share of national revenue allocated to municipalities to subsidise indigent households; and operational and capital grants from the national and provincial government. Expenditure is broken into two parts: operating expenditure, ie money spent on services such as electricity and water and employee-related costs, and repair and maintenance of infrastructure. Then there is capital expenditure, which goes to roads, water and sanitation, municipal buildings, and social housing. This income/expenditure relationship is a delicate balance according to the report, but city revenues “appear to quite resilient, growing at an average annual rate of about 8%”. Kelebogile Khunou of the Socio-economic Rights Institute of South Africa said that “where you live geographically affects your access to employment, as well as basic services”. She used as an example Siyanda informal settlement in Durban where residents were moved to a new development without being adequately consulted by those in governance. They were relocated to make way for a bridge. Most of the residents cried foul because they were now further from their places of employment, and some chose to leave work because travelling there from their new homes was now a financial deficit, Khunou said. Fred Kusambiza of Planact said that one of the NGO’s primary mandates is “linking previously marginalised citizens to economic opportunity” and that could only be achieved through “community participation in local governance”. He called for municipalities to “involve citizens, actually involve them,” as opposed to seeming to involve them just to tick admin boxes. He said municipalities should be more transparent in how they use their funds, as there is a tendency to misuse funds or offer sub-standard services, a case in point being “extended use of chemical toilets in informal settlements”. The report lists challenges that cities face in the immediate future: Cities need assistance and guidance in accessing finance for such investments, the panel said. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.