Transport and Public Works MEC Donald Grant said the committee – comprising transport department officials, provincial traffic, law enforcement, NPA and police representatives – condemned the violence “in the strongest terms” and would assist police in their investigations. Four people were shot dead in and around the local sports field on Monday morning when dozens of shots were fired. Two other people were injured, Western Cape police confirmed. “The violence is believed to be related to ongoing disputes between two associations affiliated with the two Cape mother-bodies, CATA (Cape Amalgamated Taxi Association) and CODETA (Cape Organisation for the Democratic Taxi Association). The associations are CATA: Hout Bay – Wynberg and Central Unity Taxi Association,” Grant said. “Illegal operations in this area date back a few years, resulting in sporadic clashes between the two associations. The flaring tensions and past violence, driven by disputes over routes and illegal operations, prompted the Provincial Transport Registrar to issue notices of suspension to the affected associations last week, for violation of the Code of Conduct for minibus taxi associations and operators.” KEEP UPDATED on the latest news by subscribing to our FREE newsletter. – FOLLOW News24  on Twitter Safety and security mayoral committee member JP Smith said the local taxi rank has also been shut and would be physically barricaded so that it can’t be accessed. He confirmed both associations had been suspended after last week’s shooting, in which a man was shot dead on Thursday. Several taxis had nevertheless continued to operate and were impounded in four operations conducted by the City of Cape Town’s traffic services. “Last week we did a clampdown and we will extend [it] now to try and prevent them from operating.” Grant said the suspended associations are afforded a hearing, as per law, before a decision is made by the registrar to de-register an association on the grounds of inappropriate conduct. Meanwhile, a specialist detective team was probing the shooting and several operations were underway to quell the violence, police said earlier on Monday. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.