Abdelkader Bensalah’s nomination paves the way for the start of a transitional period after Bouteflika was forced to step down a week ago in the face of mass protests that plunged the OPEC member into its deepest political crisis since a civil war in the 1990s. Algeria’s constitution mandates that power transfer to the Senate head if the president resigns. And while Bensalah’s nomination was widely expected, it is almost as unpalatable to the demonstrators as Bouteflika’s remaining in office. Pan-Arab satellite network Arabiya reported that protests resumed again within minutes of the parliament’s announcement. Bensalah will take over for a period of 90 days, during which officials are supposed to schedule new presidential elections. The backlash against the new interim president suggests that Algeria’s road ahead won’t be smooth. While the protests against Bouteflika, which began on Feb. 22, were initially aimed at ending his 20-year rule, they quickly escalated into an outright rejection of the broader ruling class. Why Change at the Top Might Not Be Enough in Algeria: QuickTake The protesters got a major boost when the military’s chief of staff bluntly stated last month that the ailing 82-year-old, rarely seen in public since suffering a stroke in 2013, must either step down or face constitutional measures to remove him from office. But even General Ahmed Gaid Salah is viewed by the demonstrators as part of the ruling establishment, or “le pouvoir” as it’s known in Algeria, an opaque group of wealthy businessmen, military officers and ruling party officials. The new administration must also work to quickly address economic problems that are looming as Algerians focus on the political upheaval. The decline in oil prices in 2014 forced authorities to draw down half of the country’s international reserves to support a generous subsidy system. Algeria’s Economic Doomsday Clock Ticks Even Faster After Revolt DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.