First published by GroundUp The number of young people who have registered to vote in the May general election is down substantially from 2014, and this despite population growth. The Parliamentary Monitoring Group (PMG) expressed concern on Wednesday that the number of 18- to 19 year-olds on the 2019 voters’ roll is 341,236. In 2014 it was 646,313, meaning the number of new voters has dropped by nearly half (47%). The number of registered 20- to 29-year-olds has dropped 4% from 5,759,236 to 5,299,297.  1 When taking into account that the population has grown by approximately 7.5% over the past five years, the drop is even more profound. In January GroundUp reported that the voter registration rate is down from 2014 (but not the absolute number of voters who registered). But PMG’s report indicates that the absolute numbers are actually down among youth (overall, including all age groups, registration is up, but not as a proportion of the population). The reason for the drop is unclear. PMG quotes elections analyst Ebrahim Fakir, who said that there is a growing tendency for younger people globally to participate less in formal political processes. “This doesn’t necessarily mean they are agnostic, disengaged or apathetic, it simply means that they express themselves politically in other ways, such as direct action, protests, cultural forums and so on,” said Fakir. The PMG notes that the huge drop among 18- to 19-year-olds was not mentioned in a recent Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) report to Parliament’s Home Affairs Portfolio Committee. This “is a concern for the PMG as this prevents Parliament from performing effective oversight”, the organisation stated. At the time of publication questions sent by GroundUp to the PMG had not yet been answered. This article will be updated when we get the IEC’s response. However, the PMG does refer to a new web-based application system which was piloted in February. The PMG quotes IEC official Granville Abrahams saying that the new technology should help improve voter registration among youth in future elections. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.