Youssef al-Hadrii, a spokesman for the rebel-controlled health ministry, was quoted as saying by DPA news agency that the attack on Sunday left more than 39 people wounded. He most of the dead were students killed in the bombing of houses and a school.  1 Citing local medical sources, The Associated Press news agency put the number of those killed at 13, including seven children. More than 100 were wounded, it added.  3 “Everyone was hysterical, some were crying and shouting in panic,” said Fatehiya Kahlani, principal of Al Raei school. “The situation was horrible as the school population is 2,100. “Some girl students were killed and others were wounded and are in a hospital as a result of the missile strike. The school building was destroyed too.” “‘We suddenly heard a fighter jet while we were at school. We then heard the first strike. We remained calm. Then came the second strike and then the third, which was the strongest of them all,” said Ali Ahmed, a wounded student.  1 “The building was damaged and we were injured by broken glass. As the fourth air strike came in, we panicked and ran home.” The Saudi-UAE-led alliance fighting the Houthis said its jets had struck a military camp in the Sanaa suburb of Sawan, according to DPA. But the coalition did not provide casualty figures. The state-run news agency in Aden, aligned with the coalition-backed government of President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi, said a warehouse used by the Houthis to store weapons was targeted. The latest conflict in Yemen  began with the 2014 takeover of Sanaa by Houthi  rebels, who toppled Hadi’s government. Air raids by a coalition led by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates  have hit schools, hospitals and wedding parties, killing thousands of Yemeni civilians. The Houthis have fired long-range missiles into Saudi Arabia  and targeted vessels in the Red Sea. The fighting in the Arab world’s poorest country has killed thousands of civilians, left millions suffering from food and medical shortages, and pushed the country to the brink of famine.  1 UN humanitarian chief Mark Lowcock has said about 80 percent of Yemen’s population – 24 million people – needs humanitarian assistance, including nearly 10 million “just a step away from famine” and nearly 240,000 “facing catastrophic levels of hunger”. DM  2 Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.