“We have to consider all the options, but after having considered that we still think that backing one-on-one with the rand is the best option,” Namibian President Hage Geingob, 77, said in an interview in Cascais, Portugal, where he attended the Horasis Global Meeting. The arid south-west African nation’s economy has partly been dragged down by anemic growth in South Africa and power shortages in that country have spilled over into Namibia, which imports electricity. That prompted calls for a review of the currency arrangement and customs agreement. The rand is one of the most-volatile currencies, making planning tough using the pegged Namibian dollar. Most of Namibia’s trade is with South Africa and its companies, such as banks FirstRand Ltd. and Nedbank Group Ltd., are also listed on the Windhoek exchange. Namibia, a country bigger than France by land area but with a population of just 2.6 million people, is part of a currency union with other smaller regional nations Lesotho and Eswatini, the monarchy formerly known as Swaziland. The rand lost 14 percent against the dollar in 2018 and is 1.4 percent stronger this year. Improving Prospects
Prospects for Namibia’s economy are improving after a two-year slump — its first ever back-to-back annual contractions — despite signs South Africa’s acceleration from weak expansion may be delayed. “We have taken tough actions, painful ones” including cutting back wasteful spending and tackling corruption, Geingob said. “Although it was painful I know we are getting out of the woods now. We are going to have a growth rate of maybe 1 percent” in 2019 and “by next year we’ll be OK.” Read more about how Namibia has been affected by South Africa’s downturn Namibia will seek private investment in its energy sector, to help provide generation capacity to the state-owned Namibia Power Corp. and reduce its reliance on imports from South Africa’s cash-strapped power utility. “In the past we had a monopoly, just NamPower,” said Geingob, who will be seeking a second term as leader in an election in November. “We hope to address that issue. It’s not easy, but I think we will overcome.” Geingob said Namibia is satisfied with its “marriage” with Anglo American Plc unit De Beers, the world’s largest diamond company, and has signed a new long-term agreement to extract the stones in a joint venture through Namdeb Holdings Ltd. “So far it is working,” he said. “We have an open-door policy where we can discuss anything and when it comes to profit-sharing I think we work. So if it is working, so why fixing if it isn’t broken.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.