Illustrative photo of Kulula.com by Gallo Images. Planning to travel this Easter weekend? Best you prepare for potential delays due to a threat of industrial action. The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) issued a 48-hour strike notice to Comair Limited (British Airways and Kulula.com) on Tuesday, 16 April indicating that the union’s members were intending to strike on Thursday. Comair, in a bid to allay travellers’ panic, responded that it had a comprehensive contingency plan in place to deal with any possible effects of the strike action. The labour action is a result of a ground staff wage dispute between Numsa and Comair in which the union accused Comair of being racist, claiming that the company paid different wages to white and black workers, even though they did the same work. Despite several meetings, an agreement is yet to be reached. An attempt to reach consensus through the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) was unsuccessful. Wrenelle Stander, Comair’s Executive Director – Airline Division said on Wednesday night that while the company continues to engage NUMSA to reach an agreement, it has also approached the Labour Court for an urgent interdict to prevent a possible strike. The matter has been set down for 10am on Thursday morning. Irvin Jim, Numsa General Secretary said: “There is a significant gap between the salaries of white workers and African workers who do the same work. Our members are fed up with being abused and exploited, and they refuse to back down.” A later statement released by the union in mid-January 2019 claimed that Comair’s wage gap between those who earn the most and those who earn the least, but are “in the same grade”, was about R7,000. The union demands that: Numsa said Comair management rejected the proposal and instead made a proposal that they would deny high earners wage increases until “other workers catch up”. The union said this proposal was unacceptable — management should not be punishing anyone for their failure to solve the problem in the first place. “This proposal is unfair and this is why we reject it… The strike will commence on Thursday (18 April), the day before the Easter weekend begins. All Comair flights nationally will be affected. We are calling on management to engage meaningfully with our demands in order to avoid a strike,” Jim said. Executive director of Comair’s Airline Division Wrenelle Stander denies Numsa’s claim that Comair staff are paid R7,000 a month more than their colleagues on the basis of race. “We run our business with integrity, fairness and transparency. We have zero tolerance for racism or any form of discrimination,” he said. “We will do everything possible to keep customers informed and minimise the impact of any strike action. We encourage customers to check in online or at the self-service kiosks at the airports and to drop their bags at the bag drop counter. Employees from across the business have volunteered to help limit possible disruption,” Stander said. At this stage, Comair is unable to meet Numsa’s demands. However, it says it has continued engaging to find a “mutually acceptable solution”. To ensure there is continuous operation, especially during the long weekend, it has approached the Labour Court for an urgent interdict in an attempt to prevent the strike. “We are just waiting to see what the Labour Court says, so we should know by tomorrow morning. However, for now, we will run as per usual,” said Comair spokesperson, Stephen Forbes, on Wednesday. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.