In order for safety to be effective, awareness is key which is why Uber has launched its latest marketing campaign “Safety Never Stops” with the idea being born from an In-Flight Safety briefing that is shown on all flights as the aviation industry is known for its continuous reminders on safety.  By promoting Uber’s Safety commitments through a nod to the In-Flight Safety Briefing, Uber is showing how they take safety as important as current best practice and leaders in transport. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Alon Lits, General Manager for Uber Sub Saharan Africa comments on the campaign; “Awareness is a key part of safety, this campaign is as important as the features themselves.  We have seen from the airline industry how important the briefing video is in increasing awareness, with our new in  rider video we aim to make sure as many people as possible know about safety features to make them more effective.”
Safety features range from the 24/7 phone support, sharing exact location and time of arrival with loved ones, providing quick access to in-app emergency assistance from a third party supplier, drivers verifying their identity with random selfie checks, providing information on drivers prior to riders getting into the car, providing Injury Protection to riders and drivers, as well as explaining how Uber takes important steps to protect personal information through phone number anonymisation. “The rider campaign is designed to highlight the key safety measures the app has in place and to help create awareness around both the existing and new safety features present for riders. We believe that it is important to continually remind consumers of the existence of safety features so that if they ever need to use them they have no doubt. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.