These are some of the key findings contained in the the Criterion Report, a quarterly market research survey conducted by the Institute of Race Relations (IRR) into voter preferences, attitudes and the South African political landscape. National It has found that, nationally, the ANC majority is in the balance at 49.5% (down from 54.7% in February), while the EFF continues to grow, from 12.2% in February to 14.9% in April. The DA has remained stable at 21.3%. The report noted a small growth in black support for the DA. “As of April, the DA has demonstrated some small growth among black voters. It currently has the support of 7.4% of all black voters, up from the 6% it secured in 2014 (the ANC is on 61.6% of all black voters and the EFF, 18.7%).” Gauteng In Gauteng, the ANC is well below a majority, with support among voters standing at 42.8%. In that province, the DA has te support if 31.9% of polled voters, but that increases to 40% on a 67.7% turnout scenario. The EFF stands on 13%, which, combined with support for the DA, could see the province led by a DA-EFF alliance. The IRR poll is similar to the DA’s internal polling which placed the ANC at 44% and the DA at 38%, according to News24. Western Cape In the Western Cape, the DA currently stands on 44.6%, down 5.5 percentage points from February (50.1%). The ANC currently stands on 27.8% on the provincial ballot, down 6.1 percentage points from February (33.9%). The ACDP currently stands on 7.0% on the provincial ballot, up 3.5 percentage points from February (3.5%), while the EFF currently stands on 6.8% on the provincial ballot, up 5.8 percentage points from February (1.0%). These parties showed significant growth in the Western Cape. Who’s voting for whom? In terms of racial demographics, the IRR found the following voting patterns at national level:61.8% of all black voters indicated they would vote ANC, compared to 18.7% for the EFF and 7.4% for the DA;68.6% of all white voters indicated they would vote DA, compared to 4.3% for the ANC and 0.8% for the EFF;68.5% of all coloured voters indicated they would vote DA, compared to 10.9% for the ANC and 4.7% for the EFF; and 60.4% of Indian voters indicated they would vote DA, compared to 12.6% for the ANC and 0% for the EFF. Support base As of April, a breakdown of the parties’ national support base shows: ANC: 96% black voters, 1% white voters, 2% coloured voters and 1% Indian voters;DA: 27% black voters, 37% white voters, 28% coloured voters and 8% Indian voters; andEFF: 97% black voters, 1% white voters, 3% coloured voters and 0% Indian voters. “In line with the IRR’s objective to become an authority on political market research, the institute has undertaken its fourth full survey of the electoral landscape, to supplement surveys carried out in September 2018, December 2018 and February 2019,” the report stated. The report issued on Tuesday comprises a sample of 2 375 registered voters and researchers were in the field between April 18-25. “Because the last few weeks of any election are fluid, as undecided voters make their final choice and the bigger parties typically ‘squeeze’ their opponents, we have decided to continue polling up until Sunday 5 May. The findings from this second and supplementary tranche – an additional sample of approximately 2 000 registered voters – will be presented to the public on Monday 6 May,” the IRR said. ‘Not a prediction’ “It is important to appreciate this poll came out of the field with 14 days of the election period still to go. The last weeks of an election campaign are a critical period during which, historically, the bigger parties – particularly the ANC and DA – tend to consolidate their vote upwards, and the vote share of smaller parties declines, as their voters are pressured. This is still likely to happen. A second IRR April poll, to be published on May 6, will aim to determine the degree to which this trend plays itself out, over the final weeks. “This poll is not a prediction,” the IRR said. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.