The potential link was seen mostly in young vapers, FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb and Principal Deputy Commissioner Amy Abernethy said in a statement on Wednesday. The FDA said it has received 35 reports of seizures possibly related to e-cigarette use between 2010 and early this year, and is concerned those numbers could indicate a wider phenomenon. “We want to be clear that we don’t yet know if there’s a direct relationship between the use of e-cigs and a risk of seizure,” Gottlieb told a House appropriations subcommittee at a hearing on the agency’s budget request. The agency is raising the issue to encourage the public to report adverse events related to e-cigarettes to the FDA’s online portal. Seizures are a known risk associated with ingestion of nicotine liquids used in e-cigarettes. The FDA has been particularly concerned about an epidemic of youth vaping associated with popular e-cigarettes made by Juul Labs Inc. and recently proposed to restrict sales of flavored products in retail stores. The agency said in its statement on Wednesday that in many of the seizure reports, it couldn’t identify a specific brand or sub-brand of device. Shares of tobacco makers who are trying to diversify away from traditional cigarettes by embracing electronic devices declined on Wednesday. Altria Group, which has a large stake in Juul Labs, fell 3 percent to $55 at 1:02 p.m. in New York, while Philip Morris International Inc. declined 2.2 percent to $86.06. An Altria spokesman declined to comment on the FDA alert. Juul spokesman Joshua Raffel said in a statement that the company has “robust safety monitoring systems in place and will vigilantly monitor for any evidence of safety issues.” Philip Morris is seeking U.S. approval for IQOS, a heated-tobacco device that would compete with Juul’s e-cigarette and that is already sold in many countries. Altria has a deal to market IQOS if cleared for sale in the U.S. “It’s clear this relates to usage reports on e-cigarettes currently available or used in the U.S.,” said Philip Morris spokesman Corey Henry. “Given that we don’t sell or market any e-cigarettes, or any nicotine-containing products, in the U.S., it’s not really our place to address adverse effects or quality issues reported to FDA on products that aren’t ours.” In the reports the FDA received, some vapers reported a prior history of seizures and some reported they had used other substances such as marijuana or amphetamines along with e-cigarettes. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.