Gauteng MEC of Education; Panyaza Lesufi speaks during the official opening of the Curtis Nkondlo School of Specialisation on May 09, 2016 in Soweto, South Africa. (Photo by Gallo Images / Sowetan / Tsheko Kabasia)  Less In just 14 days the Gauteng Department of Education’s online applications for Grades 1 and 8 for the 2020 academic year will go live. Parents and guardians applying on behalf of learners will have from 13 May 2019 until midnight 15 July 2019 to submit applications. “Parents are urged to apply online and on time. Applying on time makes it possible to obtain space in a public school,” Panyaza Lesufi, MEC of Education said. The applications will be in line with the amended admissions regulations, terms and conditions and school feeder zones. The amendments are a product of a Constitutional Court judgment which in 2016 ordered the MEC to determine feeder zones within the province. Explaining the application process, Lesufi said that “when applying online, parents have a choice to submit a maximum of five applications, either using a home address, an applicant’s sibling who attends the school being applied to, work address of either one of the parents, if the applicant lives within a 30km radius and if the applicant lives beyond a 30km radius”. Before the Constitutional Court judgment, learners had to live within a 5km radius of the school they were applying to and for many parents this meant forging a residential address to secure admission for the child to former model-C schools, which are perceived as better. “Parents are urged to use all five options because if you have five options it allows us to play along if one or two options fail,” Lesufi said. In the past, there have been issues around the system failing as a result of lacking capacity to accommodate multiple users simultaneously. “The department is pleased to announce that the capacity of the admissions online application system has been increased to accommodate 50,000 simultaneous users,” said Lesufi. “This is an increase from 40,000, which parents complained about”. The placement process, on the other hand, will be conducted on a first-come-first-served basis while prioritising the five options parents can use to apply. Lesufi said “parents should understand that living closer to the school does not entitle a person to automatic admission. Placement will depend on the time the application was made and availability of space in the school”. The department also said parents can visit the nearest public school, district admissions centres, community libraries and community centres for admissions, especially for those parents who cannot access the internet in their households. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.