Leaders will discuss the impact of the animals on humans and the legal and illegal trade in elephant products with the aim of agreeing on “concrete interventions to address the challenges posed,” the government said in an invitation to the May 3-7 meeting seen by Bloomberg. The summit was confirmed by Environment Minister Kitso Mokaila.  1 With the Botswana Democratic Party facing its tightest election since winning power more than half a century ago, President Mokgweetsi Masisi has sought to appeal to rural voters by holding public hearings on the impact of elephants, of which Botswana has the most in the world, and pledging to lift a ban on hunting. If he follows through, he’ll undo one of the signature policies of his predecessor, Ian Khama.  2 Read more about Khama’s thoughts on the change in policy “Levels of human-elephant conflict continue to escalate, especially where human and agricultural expansion moves into new areas already occupied by African elephants,” the government said in the invitation. “Livestock and crop farmers and residents in wildlife areas constantly have to contend with elephants that destroy crops and threaten livelihoods and food security.”  2 Masisi’s comments have drawn a backlash from conservationists as Botswana has long been praised for its wildlife-management policies, which have spawned a tourism industry that ranks as the economy’s second-biggest sector after diamonds.  1 The summit, which will culminate with a heads-of-state meeting on May 7, is focused on countries in the Kavango Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area. The 520,000 square-kilometer (200,773 square-mile) expanse includes swamp, savannah and riverine habitat in Botswana, Zambia, Namibia and Zimbabwe and is twice the size of the U.K. An estimated 220,000 elephants live in the area, according to the government.  1 In the invitation, Botswana also argues against the moratorium on the international trade in ivory and said attempts to manage elephant populations in southern Africa are “subjected to constant media glare, with much of this coverage ignoring the plight of rural communities who bear the brunt of living with elephants.”  2 Zambia and Zimbabwe will send their presidents and Namibia will send representatives. “Other countries do not seem to understand the plight the region is facing from elephants, we have huge numbers,” said Tinashe Farawo, a spokesman for the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Authority. “We must be allowed to sell and benefit from these animals.” DM  2 Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.