“I get it, I get it,” Biden said in a two-minute web video posted Wednesday afternoon. “I hear what they’re saying.” Biden didn’t apologize to the women who have come forward or anyone else who may have been uncomfortable, saying of his physical gestures, “It’s the way I’ve always been.” Biden, 76, has been expected to announce this month that he’ll make his third run for the Democratic presidential nomination. He gave no indication in the video of his intentions. The former vice president and senator long has been known for hugging and kissing supporters and others he comes in contact with. But in the “Me Too” era, some of the women he’s encountered have gone public in the past week to say his actions made them uncomfortable. Lucy Flores, a former Nevada assembly member, said Biden smelled her hair and delivered “a slow kiss” to the top of her head at a 2014 campaign event when she was running for state lieutenant governor. “I just can’t imagine that there was never a situation where someone said to him,” Flores, 39, said Sunday on CNN’s “State of the Union.” “You probably should stop doing that, you should probably stop touching women in that way.” At least three other women have made public statements expressing their discomfort with how Biden touched them since Flores first came forward in a New York magazine column published Friday. None of the women have said that they felt Biden’s actions were a form of sexual assault or harassment. “I’ve worked my whole life to empower women, I’ve worked my whole life to prevent abuse,” Biden said the video, which followed a written statement he released on Sunday. “So the idea that I can’t adjust that the fact that personal space is important, more important than it’s ever been, is just not thinkable. I will. I will.” He insisted he would adapt to the times. “Social norms have begun to change, they’ve shifted, and the boundaries of protecting personal space have been reset,” Biden said. “I’ll be much more mindful. That’s my responsibility, my responsibility. And I’ll mean it.” Other Democrats so far haven’t called on Biden to drop any plans for a presidential race, but several said his statements that he never intended anything untoward aren’t enough. “The focus isn’t on what his intentions were, it is how his behavior is experienced, and one should not invade personal space,” Democratic Senator Mazie Hirono of Hawaii said on Tuesday. “He needs to be a lot more aware of that.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.