The government has said it plans to do away with restrictions that stipulate that the mines must be 51 percent owned by black Zimbabweans, but is yet to change the legislation. “The indigenization regulations have been scrapped except for platinum and diamonds, we would also want this law scrapped officially so we can get industry players coming in,” Manhando said at a conference in Johannesburg on Wednesday. “These are areas that require huge capital and if you put restrictions I don’t think you would be able to attract a lot of capital.” Senior government officials have repeatedly said that the ownership laws, put in place during the presidency of Robert Mugabe, will be scrapped to help attract investment to an economy decimated by years of misrule. Mining is the country’s biggest source of foreign exchange. While the nation’s finance minister Mthuli Ncube has previously said the local ownership law would be scrapped for all minerals, government will, for now, insist that local investors retain control in diamond mining even as it seeks to lure mining giants such as Russian giant Alrosa PJSC, Polite Kambamura, deputy mines minister, said in an interview. Potential discoveries of gems in the southern Masvingo province means government needs time to gauge the potential of the industry, he added. “It has to be put down in legislation and the government is finalizing that,” he said at the conference. “It will happen very soon.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.