This is according to evidence presented to the PIC commission of inquiry on Tuesday by an official who was involved in the transaction that later led to a R4.3bn impairment in the investments of the Government Employees Pension Fund. The commission is investigating allegations of wrongdoing at the state-run asset manager, which manages R2.2trn in investments on behalf of public servants. Botsang Morobe, an Investment Associate at the PIC, provided the inquiry with details of discussions that took place prior to the deal with Lancaster signed in August 2016. ‘The asset to buy’ “There was a view that this was the asset to buy,” she said, explaining that the international retailer had been reporting positive earnings in previous years and paying dividends. “There was an appetite to buy the stock. It was a widely covered stock…we had all the data to assess it,” she said. In 2016, Lancaster 101, an entity led by former unionist Jayendra Naidoo, approached the PIC for funding to acquire a 3% shareholding in Steinhoff. The transaction was aimed at advancing the participation of black groups in the retail sector. Morobe said that prior to granting the loan, the PIC investment committee raised reservations about Lancaster 101, including Naidoo’s political exposure and union activism, as well as the composition of the company’s broad-based structure. Later assessments, however, showed that Naidoo was considered a “low risk” as he was no longer actively involved in politics. Steinhoff’s share price plunged in December 2017 when its CEO Markus Jooste abruptly stepped down after auditors flagged accounting irregularities in its financial documents. A forensic report released in March by PwC found that a small group of former executives, with the help of others outside the company, structured phony transactions that substantially inflated earnings and asset values. Steinhoff executives later named Jooste as one of the executives. Steinhoff shares were trading at R1.77 a share on Tuesday at 12:53 on the JSE, down 95% from their level before Jooste resigned. The embattled retailer announced last week that it would again delay the release of its audited financial statements due to the complexity of the accounting and audit work required. ‘A lot of work to be done’ Morobe further testified that when Steinhoff shares began to decline within a year of concluding the deal, Lancaster came up with a further funding proposal that it argued would enhance the asset manager’s position. The proposal involved raising funds to acquire 11.8% stake in Steinhoff’s JSE-listed subsidiary Steinhoff African Retail Limited. STAR has since changed its name to Pepkor Holdings. Asked if there were any prospects of yielding posting returns out of Steinhoff, she said that although it was not her place to make the call, there was “still a lot of work to be done” at Steinhoff. Morobe put the value of the PIC shares at around R200m. She said that Pepkor was a “good place” for Lancaster to be invested in, as their growth projections were promising. The inquiry is ongoing. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.