Sanders’ position puts him at odds with two of his rivals in the nomination race, Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Kamala Harris of California, as well some members of the party’s progressive wing. Speaking at a CNN town hall event in New Hampshire, the Vermont senator said the report by Special Counsel Robert Mueller shows that Trump is “the most dangerous president in the modern history of our country,’’ but added that the most important goal is making sure he’s not re-elected. He added that if going into the months leading to the 2020 elections “all that the Congress is talking about is impeaching Trump — Trump, Trump, Trump and Mueller, Mueller, Mueller” then they aren’t talking about health care, raising the minimum wage, gay rights and other issues. “What I worry about is that works to Trump’s advantage,” he said. No Exception
In her own town hall event immediately preceding Sanders, Warren chastised fellow Democrats who are wary of trying to impeach Trump even though Republicans who control the Senate would likely foil such efforts. “There is no political inconvenience exception to the United States Constitution,” Warren said. She added that every member of the House or Senate should go on record with their position on whether Trump’s actions are an impeachable offense, and “they should have to take that vote and live with it for the rest of their lives.” Harris, who also was among the five presidential candidates taking part in the town hall sessions Monday night, said Mueller’s report contained “good evidence” pointing to Trump obstructing justice. “I believe Congress should take the steps toward impeachment,” Harris said. At the same time, she warned, Democrats have to be “realistic” about the fact that the effort probably won’t succeed with Republicans in control of the Senate. “But that doesn’t mean the process shouldn’t take hold.” Democrats are divided over whether to initiate impeachment proceedings against Trump after Mueller’s report on Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election was released publicly late last week. That is evident in Congress and among the Democrats who want to replace Trump. Earlier: Democrats Summon Ex-White House Lawyer McGahn on Mueller Report Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, another of the Democratic presidential candidates, deflected a question about whether the impeachment process should begin. “I believe very strongly President Trump should be held accountable,’’ she said. “The impeachment proceedings are up to the house, they’re going to have to make that decision.’’ House Democratic leaders held a conference call with their rank and file earlier Monday to talk about Mueller’s report and their next steps. House leaders cautioned against rushing into impeachment proceedings without congressional probes that could help build the public case against Trump, according to lawmakers on the call. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.