But the residents said they had nowhere else to go. Scores of people were left sitting on the side of the road with their belongings. At one point, the Red Ants started shooting at the crowd and some people merely stood around in the vicinity of apartment blocks. Many of those who were left without a roof over their heads told News24 they would not allow voting to go ahead until the housing issue had been resolved in Mamelodi. Others said that while many of the apartments had not been finished yet, because sanitation or electricity facilities had not yet been installed, it did not deter them from moving into the flats. “We come to a point where we wanted to secure this place,” said one resident. Another person said they were willing to pay rent and finish the units themselves because they were desperate to avoid ending up homeless. Community members also said the apartments had been left open and unfinished for around three years. They moved into the units and they took up occupation earlier this year. The situation outside the apartment blocks was emotional. Many refused to leave the area until government heard their pleas for help. A 61-year-old woman was standing near one of the apartment blocks, after she was evicted, when she was shot in the leg. Several other people were also shot and wounded as they ran for cover. “We are not fighting with them, but they just started shooting at us,” the elderly woman told News24. This is a developing story. More to follow. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.