The group told News24 that they had occupied the land last month and that no one was going to remove them. The piece of land they have occupied belongs to the Midvaal municipality.  3 The municipality has obtained an eviction order against the group to vacate its land, which is earmarked for economic development. From early on Wednesday morning, residents took to the streets and set tyres and other objects alight. Around 08:00, scores of Red Ants came in 15 trucks and other vehicles. They parked outside the De Deur police station, awaiting orders from their seniors to begin evictions. Public Order Policing members also arrived at the police station to escort the Red Ants, so they could execute the evictions. We are ready to die “This is our land. We are not going anywhere. If they want war, we will give them war,” said a community member armed with a spade and who refused to be identified. Community leader Sayyid Ahmed Kgaole echoed the sentiment, saying they were prepared to die should the Red Ants demolish their homes. “We want our land. We are going nowhere. Midvaal municipality didn’t follow relevant steps when they obtained their court order. We are challenging them in court not to evict us. On April 13, the municipality dropped their court order at a single shack. Not everybody was handed that eviction order,” he said.. Kgaole claimed they had gone to the high court to challenge the eviction order. “The municipality is aware that we are challenging their eviction order in the high court. We have an advocate who is representing us pro bono. On June 27, our matter will be heard in court, but the municipality wants to evict us,” he said. Member of Mayoral Committee for Development and Planning at Midvaal municipality, Mokete Motsamai, said the occupiers had to leave. He said the land in Ward 6 was earmarked for an economic civic centre. “Two weeks ago, we obtained an eviction order and we served residents with it on time. We gave them time to vacate our land and they are refusing. The land they have occupied has no services at all and we don’t know where they obtain services from. Those people are not from Midvaal and we don’t know where they are from. “We don’t condone land invasions in our municipality. We have laws where people who want houses must properly follow them,” said Motsamai. On April 10, two people lost their lives when residents of the Ramaphosa Village informal settlement in Rus-Ter-Vaal, also in Vereeniging, clashed with Red Ants who were evicting them from their informal settlement. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.