“I’m looking forward to running in 2020,” Bennet said on CNN’s “State of the Union” on Sunday. “This obviously was unexpected. But we caught it early. It’s something that I think we’re going to be able to treat. And I don’t think it should keep me off the trail.” Bennet announced last week that the cancer was discovered during a screening and that he plans to have surgery when Congress recesses this month, followed by a few weeks of recovery. “I would like to get on with this,” he said on CNN. About one in nine American men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer during his lifetime. “It was detected early, and as a result, my prognosis is good,” Bennet said when he announced the diagnosis. The Colorado senator is among at least five more Democrats considering the party’s race for the right to challenge Republican President Donald Trump in 2020, including former Vice President Joe Biden. Democratic Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio bought the number of declared candidates to 16 when he announced his bid Thursday. “Progressives, independents, we need to unify around policies that move the ball down the field and start helping more working-class people,” Ryan, a former high school quarterback, said on CBS’s “Face the Nation” on Sunday. Bennet, 54, a former managing director of Denver’s Anschutz Investment Co., drew national attention with an impassioned floor speech in January criticizing Republican Senator Ted Cruz of Texas during the partial federal government shutdown. But he has a penchant for bipartisanship and independent thinking. Democratic presidential candidate Pete Buttigieg, the 37-year-old mayor of South Bend, Indiana, said on NBC’s “Meet the Press” on Sunday he would “stack up my experience against anybody.” He said the timing is right for candidate like him to “change the channel from this mesmerizing horror show that’s going on in Washington right now.” Buttigieg, a gay Rhodes scholar and former Naval intelligence officer who speaks seven languages, has been enjoying a boomlet of popularity and raised $7 million for his White House bid during the first quarter. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.