Farage, the former leader of the U.K. Independence Party, is spearheading a new vehicle — the Brexit Party — which launches its contest for next month’s European Parliament elections on Friday. Addressing an event in the pro-Brexit city of Coventry, England, Farage warned opponents his approach was now “no more Mr. Nice Guy,” He said he’d placed a 1,000-pound ($1,300) bet on his party coming top in the election and slammed the political establishment as incompetent. “We are lions led by donkeys,” he said. The government does not want to hold the vote scheduled for May 23 because the country is in the process of leaving the European Union. But Prime Minister Theresa May has conceded the election will need to go ahead if the Brexit deal she’s negotiated with the bloc is not ratified in Parliament in time.Euroskeptics such as Farage are dismayed that Brexit has now been delayed twice — and the U.K. is currently scheduled to remain inside the EU until Oct. 31, if Parliament does not approve the divorce agreement before then. ‘Betrayed’
“Three years ago we voted to leave the European Union. We were told it would be implemented,” Farage told BBC Radio on Friday. “We have been betrayed — and the fightback begins today.” In Coventry, he introduced one of the candidates who would run — Annunziata Rees-Mogg, sister of hardline Brexiteer Jacob — who said she was ditching the Conservative Party over May’s handling of the divorce.  2 “My country needs to be recognized in the democratic way that it has called for. Our politicians need to listen to what the people have said,” she said.  2 The 55-year-old politician has been a thorn in the side of May’s ruling Conservative Party since David Cameron took office in 2010. His brand of uncompromising euroskepticism tempted senior Tory politicians to defect to UKIP, which shocked the political establishment in 2014 by winning the popular vote in the European Parliament elections of that year. Threat to Tories
It was Farage’s electoral threat that persuaded Cameron to promise a referendum on EU membership, and he put it in the Conservative Party manifesto in the 2015 general election. Britain voted a year later to exit the bloc and Cameron — who campaigned to remain — resigned as prime minister. Farage predicted a political “revolution” as rising disillusionment at May’s handling of Brexit builds momentum for his new party. At least one Tory member of Parliament is considering voting for the Brexit Party if the elections go ahead. According to Farage, it has received 750,000 pounds ($980,000) in small donations online since it launched 10 days ago. While officials are preparing for the elections to be held, May’s office insists she could cancel the vote as late as the day before — if her deal is ratified. But Farage said that would be a big mistake, making voters who feel they’re being denied the Brexit they opted for in 2016 “even more furious.” “People are angry enough already that their vote has been robbed from them,” he said. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.