Live television footage on Monday showed flames leaping up the spire before it toppled onto the fire-engulfed roof, with smoke billowing out into the evening skyline of the French capital. The cathedral, which is located on one of two islands in the middle of the Seine River, had been under renovation and scaffolding covered much of the roof. The TV images of the blaze transfixed viewers around the world, as flames ravaged the church that has towered over Paris for centuries and had come through long-range German bombardment during World War I and was spared damage during World War II. Thousands of onlookers were being kept at a distance by police as ashes fell onto streets surrounding the monument. The cathedral is a major tourist destination, with the number of visitors swelling to as many as 50,000 people a day, especially during periods like now — the holy week in the Christian calendar that leads up to Easter. Paris Mayor Anne Hidalgo said firefighers were on the scene and she asked everyone to respect the security perimeter. Extra help from outside the city were headed to the capital to help contain the blaze. Macron was also headed to the site after postponing a much-anticipated speech on planned policy measures following a series of violent protests by the Yellow Vest movement that rocked the capital. “Notre-Dame is engulfed with flames. Emotion of the whole nation,” Macron said on Twitter. “Thoughts are with Catholics and all the French. Like all citizens, I am sad to see this part of us burn.” “Deep emotion in the face of this dramatic fire at the cathedral,” Unesco said on Twitter, noting the monument was made a world heritage site in 1991. Even President Donald Trump was following the fire. Construction got underway in the 12th century, though the current structures are mostly the result of renovations carried out in the 19th century following damage during the French Revolution. The Cathedral was at one time in a state of total disrepair and close to the point of being demolished, but was later saved by Napoleon who himself was crowned Emperor in 1804 inside the Cathedral. The interior of the cathedral is 427 by 157 feet, with its 115-foot-high roof. Two massive early Gothic towers crown the western facade, which is divided into three stories and has its doors adorned with early Gothic carvings and surmounted by a row of figures of Old Testament kings. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.