Integrity committee chairperson George Mashamba said on Tuesday that the committee referred the names to the ANC’s national executive committee (NEC) on Monday. “The elders concluded the process on Monday following a meeting on Saturday,” he told News24.  2 Mashamba declined to say if any names had been red flagged, and only mentioned that the NEC “may want to come back to us”. The ANC has been heavily criticised over its candidate lists – even within its own ranks – and party stalwarts have called upon those implicated in corruption and other forms of wrongdoing to step aside.  2 Final say The controversial candidates on the lists include Malusi Gigaba (former minister of home affairs), Nomvula Mokonyane (environmental affairs minister) and Mosebenzi Zwane (former minister of mineral resources), who have been implicated in state capture linked to the Gupta family or prison services firm Bosasa (now African Global Operations). In the past week, the ANC’s senior leaders have insisted that the commission of elders have a final say on who will be urged to step down following its review process. Mashamba however disputed this saying that the integrity committee’s had limited terms of reference. “We act according to the terms of reference. We make recommendations and the NEC has a final say. If members challenge the recommendations, they appeal to the NEC and the NEC can make a final judgement.” ANC elections head Fikile Mbalula however asserted that it’s “non-negotiable” when the ANC tells candidates to “step aside”. “That will apply to any other individual on the list of the African National Congress,” he said earlier, adding that the ANC would not shy away from issues that may have implications of the integrity of the ruling party. The assessment of the ANC’s candidate lists follows an NEC decision to review the names put forward. The integrity committee, which comprises members elected from the party’s elders, investigates party members who bring the ANC into disrepute. Earlier, ANC acting national spokesperson Dakota Legoete told News24 that people who are being investigated by Chapter 9 institutions were also on the chopping block.  4 DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.