At a media briefing on Thursday, Zikalala began by thanking government, communities and all those who have offered support in the aftermath of the devastating floods. “We are quite devastated by the growing number of fatalities. We are told that the number is now getting around 70, but final figures will be released during the day,” he said.  2 “It is a situation that is worrying, but as government, we will be working to ensure that we prepare assistance for all those who have been affected, particularly those who are now displaced.” Zikalala said government would coordinate efforts to ensure shelter, clothing and any other essentials they may need currently. He added that government would be working with family members who had lost loved ones to ensure that they receive dignified send-offs. Port St Johns President Cyril Ramaphosa together with national and provincial officials visited affected areas on Wednesday. Ramaphosa has also undertaken to visit the Eastern Cape town of Port St Johns in the next few days to assess the situation there. During his visit, Ramaphosa conveyed his condolences to the families that lost loved ones. He also announced that emergency relief funds are available and will be allocated to assist affected communities. Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister, Zweli Mkhize said his department will continue to coordinate all role-players in order to respond rapidly to the incident in KZN. “Government is also paying attention on other provinces that are experiencing the same challenges.” DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.