<span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span><span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>
There is any number of signifiers when it comes to how we categorise ourselves and others within groups and subcultures; one of the easiest to point out are the clothes we choose to wear. From the rather basic way in which we associate gender with specific dress codes – a practice that will hopefully continue to become less and less of a thing – through to the way we sometimes demonstrate our association to a group: bikers in leather jackets, suburban dads in golf tees and cargo shorts, hip-hop heads in saggy jeans and bubblegoose jackets, etc. Then, of course, there are the uniforms we wear to signify our place within a professional setting, be it lawyers and judges in their ominous black robes or construction workers in blue overalls. Even the sceptic would have to admit, we place a lot of value on how we dress. Dare to dress in a way the culture doesn’t quite understand, and questions start to pop up about your identity and your place in society. The Youtube trailer describes FanCon Cape Town Comic Con 2019 as “bigger, better and geekier than ever”, a celebration of “pop culture, comic books, and all sorts of geekdom”. And indeed, many enthusiasts who self-identify as geeks come out in their droves, many of them in head-to-toe costumes that have taken weeks, months and even a couple of years to create, all based on their favourite comic book and TV characters. Here, within these walls, there seems to be no judgement, except perhaps to judge how well they’ve put together their costumes. Here, their creative expression is a thing of beauty, not a target for derision and ostracism. The gender of the character they choose to dress up as need not be the same as the gender they identify as, or in some cases, the gender identity imposed on them. As you’ll see in the video above, a number of the cosplayers are film industry professionals, who spend their days creating the costumes and faces that keep us entertained. For them, FanCon also presents an opportunity to build their network. The event is not just about dressing up of course; while it is understandably lacking in the celebrity power of its world-famous American counterpart, the San Diego Comic-Con International, there are still quite a few comic artists that fans can meet up with, “geekmerch” to buy, and a number of panel talks throughout the weekend covering a wide variety of topics of interest to fans of pop culture and comic books. No doubt the cosplay scene has its complications, as much came through in some of the panel talks, and indeed a quick Google search reveals cracks in the somewhat utopian picture that might be painted by the paragraph above. Movements like “Cosplay is not consent”, founded in 2013, are a direct response to incidents of sexual harassment, stalking, intimidation and general unwelcome physical attention. But for a weekend in April, parents, kids, artists, architects, film professionals and the general geek fandom gathered at the Cape Town International Convention Centre in the name of fun, creative expression and community. And it seemed the only identity that mattered was that of their choosing. ML Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.