This was according to a BusinessDay report on Friday which stated that the NPA said Kuzwayo had been “protected and housed” by the police in a safe house after she accused the former president in 2005. Zuma was acquitted of the rape in May 2006. Kuzwayo died on October 7, 2016. In October last year, Zuma’s legal team requested information on whether the NPA paid Kuzwayo. The request was in support of his legal team’s application for a permanent stay of his prosecution for corruption, News24 reported. Zuma faces charges of fraud, racketeering, corruption, money laundering and tax evasion, dating back to the infamous arms deal in the late 1990s. Zuma stated in court papers that he believed the trial was an attempt to tarnish his name, and claimed the prosecution was biased, News24 reported. According to the BusinessDay report, a letter dated January 7 which was sent to Zuma’s lawyers, stated that the NPA had been unable to obtain any form of payments from November 2005 to August 2008 to Khwezi. The publication further reported that in its response, the NPA further handed over the “materials relating to the income tax offences” Zuma had been charged with. The tax charges relate to his alleged failure to submit tax returns from 1995 to 2003 and declare income of R2.7m, as well as the alleged evasion of R1.6m in taxes. Zuma’s corruption trial will resume again on May 20 in the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Pietermaritzburg. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.