“In light of the 800,000 great American workers not receiving pay, I am sure you would agree that postponing this public relations event is totally appropriate,” Trump wrote Pelosi, a day after she suggested he postpone his State of the Union speech scheduled for Jan. 29.  2 Pelosi had not announced her trip, and the Afghanistan stop likely would not have been made public in advance for her security. She would have been expected to fly on a military plane to the country. As speaker of the House, Pelosi is allowed to request the use of military aircraft for her travels.  1 “I also feel that, during this period, it would be better if you were in Washington negotiating with me and joining the Strong Border Security movement to end the shutdown,” Trump added. Trump said Pelosi was free to make the trip “by flying commercial.” Pelosi’s office didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment. The shutdown hasn’t stopped administration officials from traveling. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin plans to lead a U.S. delegation including Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross and Secretary of State Michael Pompeo to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland next week. The House Ways and Means Committee summoned Mnuchin on Thursday for a hearing on the shutdown on Jan. 24, when he is scheduled to depart Davos. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.