Ahmed Douma was arrested in 2013 on charges of clashing with security forces in Cairo two years earlier, and received a 25-year prison sentence in 2015. But the court of cassation overturned the ruling in October 2017 and ordered a retrial, which concluded on Wednesday. In addition to the 15-year jail term, Douma was fined six million Egyptian pounds ($335,000, 290,000 euros), a judicial source said. The verdict can be appealed. Douma was a leading activist in the 2011 revolt that toppled former president Hosni Mubarak, who was succeeded by Islamist Mohamed Morsi. President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, a former army chief who led the military in ousting Morsi, is accused of leading a relentless crackdown on both pro-democracy campaigners and Islamists. While numerous key activists from the revolution are behind bars, the majority of top figures from Mubarak’s regime have gradually been acquitted and freed. The 2011 revolt saw hundreds of thousands of protesters call for “bread, freedom and social justice” and rally against a regime seen as corrupt and dictatorial. But eight years on, the majority of experts view Sisi’s government as the most repressive in the history of modern Egypt. In an interview with American network CBS aired this week, the president said Egypt has no political prisoners. Egyptian authorities systematically deny allegations of human rights abuses. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.