In a four-page letter sent to DA leader Mmusi Maimane last Friday, Ngwenya set out her reasons, adding that it would not come as a surprise to him. “The bottom line is that I do not believe the DA takes policy seriously; and as a result, there has not been the operational or political resources necessary to result in a policy outcome I can be proud to be associated with,” she wrote in the conclusion of her letter. Ngwenya cites five operational causes and four political causes behind her decision to resign. Among them, she said she felt unfairly repudiated by some party leaders for an opinion piece she wrote about the ANC’s failure on BBBEE, in which she quoted Maimane. She also said some policy positions had been held “hostage” and that “There was an apparent distancing of the leadership from the policy process, with a consistent reference to ‘Gwen’s policy’.” More to follow. This story will be updated. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.