Mayor Dan Plato had proposed an adjusted budget for extra security measures in the council meeting earlier on Thursday.  2 “We want toilets, water and electricity,” said protester Ncedo Nkonyana, after balancing on his head and doing air splits in front of the police lined up at the top of the steps to the civic centre. Earlier, at least three stun grenades boomed in the civic precinct while people carrying posters continued to toyi-toyi. ANC caucus leader Xolani Sotatshe said that one person had been arrested and another had been bruised during the confrontation. Sotashe said he was listening to Plato give the council the highlights of the budget when he received an SMS about the protest outside. “And nobody is going to listen to them,” he said. Sotashe and ANC councillor Khaya Yozi, as well as the party’s chief whip in the council Tandie Manikivana, left the meeting to find out what was happening. “His (Plato’s) response to them was that they should not jump the queue,” claimed Sotashe. He said the residents did not know which informal settlements had been prioritised and that they wanted answers. Sotashe said there were also allegations that people in Hout Bay’s Temporary Relocation Area (TRA), where people were moved to after a catastrophic fire in Imizamo Yethu in 2017, were still waiting for the reblocking to be finished so that they could return home.  1 The delegation left to go back into the centre, saying they were going to discuss the latest development with Plato. In a speech prepared for delivery, Plato, who took over from De Lille in November 2018, said that since he took office there had been an increase in service delivery, with R115m for cleaning up communities and extra R165m for extra safety measures. He lamented the destruction of a community park in Sea Winds that cost R7.6m to build. The proposals include an additional R26.7m towards human settlements and title deed restoration.  1 Inside the council, protesters in the public gallery were also removed. Plato was due to address the protesters later on Thursday. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.