News24 understands the DA Gauteng premier candidate’s tenure will end in February, after which he will commit more time to his campaign for the provincial office. It is expected that the speaker of council, Katlego Mathebe, will take over from Msimanga as mayor. Msimanga took over as mayor in 2016 through a coalition government after the municipal elections that did not produce an outright victor in the City. The coalition and working relationship between the DA and the EFF resulted in an ANC government that was riddled with in-fighting being kicked out of power and onto the city council’s opposition benches – for the first time since the dawn of democracy. However, Msimanga has been feeling the heat from community members, opposition parties and even from members of his own caucus who have grown unhappy and have expressed a lack of faith in his leadership skills. The ANC in Tshwane and its leader, Kgosi Maepa, have been calling for Msimanga’s removal for several months amid the mayor’s running battles with city manager Moeketsi Mosola over the multibillion-rand GladAfrica contract scandal. Msimanga has also been accused of making a number of improper appointments, including those of his chief of staff and spokesperson, while the EFF, which is in a partnership with the DA in Tshwane, had previously attempted to get rid of Msimanga through a motion of no confidence. Msimanga and the DA are expected to use the upcoming polls as the reason for the development. Some have accused the party of seeing him as a liability and wanting to conveniently remove him from difficult Tshwane politics. He was initially expected to step down at the end of last year, but News24 understands both Msimanga and December commitments got in the way. Last year DA leader Mmusi Maimane and federal executive chairperson James Selfe confirmed that various conversations had taken place around Msimanga’s continued stay as mayor, with Selfe admitting he had thought it ideal for the Tshwane mayor to step down while on the campaign trail. There has been no indication about whether stepping down would mean that Msimanga would join the Gauteng legislature should he lose out on the premier position or that he would return to Tshwane as mayor. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.