“He was treated on the scene and taken by ambulance to hospital,” said City of Cape Town fire and rescue spokesperson Theo Layne. He said the fire started just before 16:00 on Sunday on the Kloof Nek Road side, with the blaze thought to have started near Quarry Hill Road, further down the slopes. “It was fanned by a strong south-easterly wind, it spread up over Signal Hill and over Signal Hill Road,” said Layne as a water bombing helicopter and a spotter plane flew overhead. Signal Hill is a popular viewing point for visitors to Cape Town. During the course of the early evening, the blaze spread to the Sea Point and Fresnaye side of the hill, with strong winds also spreading the fire up Lion’s Head. About 20 firefighting vehicles were on the scene, with South African National Parks (SANParks) also scrambling to add to the more than 80 professional firefighters from the City of Cape Town. Crews that remained on the scene throughout the night found the seriously injured man. He had sustained 45% burn wounds to his upper body. Fire contained On Monday morning flames could still be seen on charred tree trunks, but with only a light breeze, there was hope that they would be put out completely. Roads through the area and to the cableway were open, but Signal Hill Road was closed to allow fire crews to move easily and for safety. On the Lion’s Head side, a fire truck squeezed through the narrow roads lined with mansions after checking on the status of the blaze. “The fire is contained for now but the expectation is that the wind will pick up and we will have flare ups and hotspots,” said Layne. The fire line from the top of Signal Hill showed that it stopped just before it reached the houses. There was also a melted hose on one section of the street indicating the severe conditions under which the firefighters worked. An exhausted SANParks firefighter bit into a piece of watermelon and wiped his face as a water bombing helicopter and a spotter plane flew over stubborn flames and puffs of smoke.  2 “We are tired. We have been here the whole night,” he said. DM  4 Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.