Department of Correctional Services (DCS) spokesperson Logan Maistry on Thursday said the “precautionary suspension” was not related to former Bosasa executive Angelo Agrizzi’s testimony. “It was the culmination of a process that began earlier this month before the state capture inquiry. The department is unable to provide further details, as this matter related to an employment relationship.” Nxele is the latest high ranking official to be implicated in state capture this week where he was alleged to have taken bribes of around R57 500 per month. He was alleged to have influenced a plot to put undue pressure on former DCS national commissioner Vernie Petersen in 2007. Agrizzi on Tuesday made the claims, saying Bosasa had attempted to bribe senior officials at DCS in order to undermine Petersen, who had just been appointed. Petersen allegedly did not want to deal with Bosasa, leading to a meeting of the senior officials. There, they discussed how “they could swing Petersen and get to a solution where he would start communicating with Bosasa”. Agrizzi said Nxele was part of the team of senior officials who would be paid a R1m per month bribe for their influence.  3 Agrizzi said the payments to the team stopped in 2008 after one of Bosasa’s companies, Sondolo IT, lost a contract for the staffing of control rooms at correctional services facilities. Agrizzi’s testimony before the commission continues. DM  1 Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.