A 1993 Nissan loaded with 80 kilos of pentolite explosive detonated at the General Santander academy in southern Bogota on Thursday morning, Attorney General Nestor Humberto Martinez said, adding that investigators have identified the terrorist. Photos on social media accounts showed the charred remains of the vehicle. Martinez didn’t say whether the bomber was among the dead. Colombia’s homicide rate rose last year as drug traffickers fought for control of territory after the nation’s biggest guerrilla group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, handed in its weapons following the peace deal. President Ivan Duque took office last year pledging a hard line on drug trafficking cartels. Production of coca, the raw material for making cocaine, has more than tripled over the last five years, fueling violence across large swathes of the country. The government has yet to accuse anyone for the bomb attack, or suggest a motive, but suspicion has focused on the National Liberation Army, or ELN, a Marxist rebel group which has moved into former FARC areas. Negotiations between the government and the ELN have broken down since Duque took office in August, said Claudia Navas, Colombia risk analyst at Control Risks. The attack fits the group’s modus operandi, she said. “This is probably the ELN trying to send the Duque government a message to try to push him to soften his stance,” she said. Terrorist attacks in the Colombian capital reached a peak during a bombing campaign by Pablo Escobar’s Medellin cartel in the 1980s and early 1990s. A bomb targeting a former Justice Minister killed three people near Bogota’s financial district in May 2012. An explosion at an upscale shopping mall in Bogota in 2017 also killed three. The 2016 peace deal with the FARC ended a conflict that had lasted more than five decades. As talks between the government and ELN stalled last year, the group stepped up its operations, carrying out dozens of attacks on oil pipelines in rural areas. The ELN has been fighting the state since the 1960s, and says it wants a Cuban-style revolution in Colombia. It has strongholds near the border with Venezuela and in the Pacific region. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.