Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs chairperson Hlomani Chauke urged the department to consider the ban during working hours following an “excessive amount of complaints”.  69 “It is unacceptable that the public spends excessive amounts of time at home affairs offices while officials spend a disproportionate amount of time busy with their cellphones,” he said on Monday.  86 Chauke said the grievances pointed to poor public service by officials.  11 “Officials are primarily employed to offer a service and the complaints point to dereliction of duty by some officials, yet they continue to draw a salary at the end of the month.”  64 Chauke also revealed that poor service was observed at ports of entry across the country.  9 “This gives a bad impression to visitors when they arrive in the country. This is more concerning because the president has anchored his economic growth drive to tourism, which will be undermined by poor service.”  66 Unreliable software He called for the nationwide implementation of a draft framework that would give guidelines on the use of cellphones at front desks. The framework would include guidelines on how officials should be contacted in cases of family emergencies.  2 “One of the keys to resolving the long queues at home affairs offices is by ensuring that officials are at their desks offering the services they are employed to do.”  74 Chauke said the committee was cognisant of the fact that one of the major causes of long queues was unreliable IT software.  4 “But professional service at the department must improve,” he said. In March last year, a video of a home affairs official using social media while stamping documents went viral. In the video the official, who is wearing a black home affairs T-shirt, can be seen distractedly checking a passport while focusing on her phone where a Facebook feed is open. DM  7 Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.