  Three former Correctional Services Commissioners and a Chief Financial Officer are among a gang of diligent Bosasa lieutenants alleged to have taken cash and favours to bend the rules for the facilities management company. Linda Mti, Zach Modise, Khulekani Sithole and Patrick Gillingham, the Zondo Commission heard, were intermittently on the take over more than 10 years. Mi-Plan – The Best Global Fund Over 1,2,3,4…5 YEARS WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING McBride to go after Cele over contract IPID head Robert McBride has revealed his challenge of Police Minister Bheki Cele’s decision not to renew his contract. Hired on a five-year basis, McBride has been instrumental in several significant investigations into police corruption. With McBride gone, many SAPS bigwigs would issue a sigh of collective relief. Ouattara seeks a third term The Ivory Coast’s President Alassane Ouattara has revealed his intention to run for a third five-year term. While this is technically illegal, Ouattara argued that a 2016 constitution allowed him the ability to renew his term in office. Considering that Laurent Gbagbo was forced out at the literal barrel of a gun because of electoral fraud, Ouattara is taking a risky gamble on his perceived popularity. Supreme Court backs Trump transgender military ban The United States Supreme Court has voted 5-4 to ban certain transgender groups from serving or continuing to serve in the military. A Donald Trump-induced ban cited “tremendous” costs associated with allowing transgender Americans to serve, despite a 2016 Pentagon study utterly refuting this. All four liberal Supreme Court judges voted against the motion. Bieber’s boxing startup seeks VC Rumble Fitness, a boxing-styled fitness class used by Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez, is seeking serious venture capital, $200 million to be precise. The expensive classes have become a hit among celebrities, with Rumble clearly looking to export its A-list popularity. With Bieber’s manager pushing for the VC funding as well, you just might see a Rumble Fitness near a Sandton banking HQ soon. Mi-Plan – South Africa’s No.1 Global Multi-Asset Flexible Fund Chinese workers make red lanterns at a private lantern factory ahead of the Chinese Lunar New Year or Spring Festival, in Tuntou village, Hebei province, China, 18 January 2019. Daily Maverick – Hopeful since 2009 After the last ten years, it’s easy to be cynical in South Africa. Especially when it comes to politics. But cynicism doesn’t build a better society; it doesn’t hold power to account and it doesn’t expect better from our leaders. Daily Maverick believes in hope and we hope for a better South Africa. And while hope isn’t a strategy – supporting truly independent media is. Join Maverick Insider and be part of something positive. The number of days since Berlin’s new airport postponement began. It is due to open in October 2020. Today in 1879 the Battle of Rourke’s Drift ends.  The panther is not a real animal. It is a name used for any black furred feline big cat. Featured Articles Weather BFN: min: 17° max: 37°, cloudy
CPT: min: 15° max: 20°, cloudy
DBN: min: 21° max: 28°, cloudy
EL: min: 17° max: 26°, rainy
JHB: min: 17° max: 25°, rainy
MHK: min: 20° max: 36°, sunny
NLP: min: 17° max: 34°, cloudy
PE: min: 17° max: 23°, cloudy
PMB:min: 18° max: 33°, cloudy Financial Data Oil=$61.06
Gold=$1,283.50
R/$=13.91
R/€=15.82
R/£=18.04
JSE All Share=54,078.37
DJIA=24,425.84
BTC$=3 582 Mi-Plan – South Africa’s No.1 Global Fund Over 1,2,3,4…5 YEARS Copyright © 2018 Daily Maverick, All rights reserved.
You are receiving this mail because you are awesome
and on the Daily Maverick First Thing subscriber list.
Interested in advertising with us?
Click here to sign the pact.  Unsubscribe                                          Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.