Mike Boren, a 28-year-old driver for Dante’s Pizzeria, wore three pairs of socks on Tuesday and still struggled to say warm. The three-store chain said it will close Wednesday in response to extreme cold sweeping the region. “It’s not pleasant,” he said. “There’s a lot of stomping in the snow.” Bitter cold is expected across the upper Midwest to the Northeast, prompting warnings to stay indoors. In Chicago, temperatures are forecast to undercut those in the Arctic Circle on Wednesday night. At Chicago O’Hare International Airport, it’s supposed to reach minus-22 Fahrenheit (minus-30 Celsius) Wednesday and go even lower Thursday. That’s leading restaurants to give employees the day off. La Colombe Coffee Roasters is closing its five Chicago cafes. “While we pride ourselves on being there for our community, this circumstance is too severe and we need to consider the safety of our people behind the bar. We hope you understand,” the company said in an email. Chiya Chai Cafe in Chicago’s Logan Square neighborhood also will be closed, and has a sign on the door saying it wants to ensure everyone’s safety during the “inclement weather conditions.” Wendy’s Co. says “many” of its Chicago-region locations are closing early Tuesday evening.  1 “Our first priority is employee safety, and we will continue to monitor the situation and will make decisions on individual company and franchisee restaurant closures throughout the next 48 hours,” spokeswoman Heidi Schauer said in an email. Delivery-oriented businesses that do stay open could get a lift. Bad weather typically drives sales, Papa John’s International Inc. said in an emailed statement. At Dante’s on Tuesday afternoon, deliveries were running three or four times normal. But the company was poised to shut down a little early depending on the temperature and conditions. For Boren, who was scheduled to work until 11 p.m., the frigid weather wasn’t so concerning.  1 “I’d like to make money, so I don’t mind going late,” he said. “I’ve got a lot of layers on.” DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.