At the time, the company in question, Professional Protection Alternatives (PPA), denied the allegation that its guards had removed beachgoers and said they were helping local government authorities with problems at the beach. The company said they were accompanying City of Cape Town law enforcement officers after two teenage girls were allegedly raped.  1 But police said no rapes had been reported. The incident was labelled as racist by several organisations, describing it as akin to apartheid beach bans. The incident culminated in a sheep being slaughtered on the beach. City of Cape Town Mayor Dan Plato, at the time, denied that the incident was racially motivated: “The feedback I have received is that, despite the insinuation that particular race groups were targeted, all race groups were in fact asked to leave the beach; and they were asked in a peaceful, non-aggressive manner.” Now, the environmental affairs portfolio committee has scheduled an inquiry into what they call the “closing off of Clifton Fourth Beach to members of the public”. The inquiry is scheduled for Monday. The City of Cape Town, PPA, representatives of environmental affairs, the police and the Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority (Psira) will all be invited to Monday’s meeting.  1 Earlier this month, Psira announced that its “full-scale investigation” into the Clifton Fourth Beach incident was nearing completion. At the time, the regulatory authority said it had received additional statements from eyewitnesses and “complaints with intimate information”. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.