The allegations were made by former Bosasa COO Angelo Agrizzi – coincidentally around the same time Nxele was suspended for an unrelated labour dispute. On Tuesday, Nxele took the Department of Correctional Services (DCS) to the Labour Court in Durban to dispute his suspension. Speaking to the media after the proceedings, he said he was suspended after disciplinary processes involving a manager emerged. “It involves a manager who had been dismissed in 2014 and reinstated by the bargaining council in 2017 and resumed work in November 2018.” Unfortunate Nxele said “certain processes” that we had undertaken inside the department that led up to the manager’s suspension were being “looked at” to establish any discrepancies. “At this stage, that [discrepancies] has not been established. For the sake of the investigation, they feel that I should not be at work. I came to court because facts are on the table on the matter. There is no basis for me to be placed on suspension.” He said it was unfortunate that his suspension was unfairly linked to Bosasa. When asked about the Bosasa claims by Agrizzi, he said he was disappointed that the commission did not speak to him. “I was uncomfortable without me being informed. They never told me I was in his testimony. I wrote to the commission after that. ” “My understanding is that the commission ought to have alerted me to this so I could be in a position to prepare for my participation and response to the allegation.”  2 Nxele said he and the commission have been in discussions since. When asked if he took any bribes from Bosasa, he said: “I don’t want to discuss matters of the commission outside the commission. That will be undermining processes.”  2 Nxele is one of the latest high-ranking officials to be implicated in state capture. Last week he was accused of taking bribes of around R57 500 per month. He was alleged to have influenced a plot to put undue pressure on former DCS national commissioner Vernie Petersen in 2007. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.