“The truth of the matter is that this unbundling is nothing but privatization,” the NUM’s Highveld region said in an emailed statement. “This decision will lead to massive retrenchments at Eskom,” Bizzah Malekutu waga Motubatse, the region’s deputy chairman, said in the statement.  4 The region’s special council “resolved on marching to Luthuli House and embarking ona full-blown strike on the week of the national and provincial elections,” it said, referring to the headquarters of the ruling African National Congress. South Africa will hold national and provincial elections in May, though a date has yet to be announced.  4 Earlier this week Business Day reported that the ANC agreed that selling shares in Eskom is an option to rescue the debt-laden utility, citing a resolution adopted by the party’s executive that met the preceding weekend.  1 A task team appointed by President Cyril Ramaphosa put forward a package of proposals that includes splitting Eskom into three state-owned companies for generation, transmission and distribution, and also recommended a substantial bailout and tariff increases, the Johannesburg-based newspaper reported. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.