 DM: In October 2018, CSA publicly announced a projected R654-million loss over the next four years. That number has twice been revised – to R244-million at a meeting on 13 February 2019 and then back up to R350-million on 6 March 2019 without any explanation. Can you explain? DM: On 6 April 2019 CSA announced that domestic cricket would be restructured in 2020. The current six professional franchises and 15 semi-professional provincial teams would be replaced by 12 teams plus two associates – Mpumalanga and Limpopo. CSA did not consult key stakeholders before announcing the decision, leading to court action from Saca. Why? DM: SuperSport head of acquisitions Marc Jury also sent an email to Corrie van Zyl on 23 December 2016, expressly stating that increasing the domestic competitions would add no value. “We urge you (CSA) to remain with the six existing franchise teams. Less is more in this instance,” Jury wrote. On what commercial basis was expansion decided upon? DM: Despite supposed austerity measures, such as a proposed R76-million cut in professional player budgets, “Operational Excellence costs” have budgeted to increase by 44% or R633-million for the remainder of the current cycle. Can you explain? DM: The two editions of Mzansi Super League (MSL) will result in a R200-million loss for CSA. Saca believes that figure is being understated. Can you give more detail? DM: The failure to launch the T20 Global League in November 2017, which had the backing of several big Indian sponsors as well as a willing broadcaster in SuperSport: Mr Moroe and the new leadership structure scrapped the competition and tried to relaunch the MSL without sponsors or a broadcaster. Why was this done? DM: Cash reserves have dropped to a few hundred million in the past two years. Is there a reasonable explanation for that situation? DM: Why did Mr Moroe not take a stronger stance against the BCCI over Proteas players in the IPL in the same way Cricket Australia and the ECB did with their players? Proteas players were overplayed and injured at the start of the CWC. Daily Maverick has a copy of the post-tournament report confirming this. DM: Why was Ottis Gibson informed that his contract would not be extended on the day the Proteas left for CWC 2019 when he had been led to believe he would have an extension until April 2021. DM: Did Mr Moroe and Mr Nenzani have an agenda to “Africanise cricket” as several of our sources have confirmed? DM: Why did Mr Moroe refuse to deal with Saca CEO Tony Irish any longer when he is mandated to do so? Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.