Mokgalapa made the announcement at a media briefing in Pretoria early on Monday morning, reports eNCA. The mayor reportedly said the contract was terminated by mutual agreement. Last month, embattled municipal manager of the City of Tshwane Moeketsi Mosola did an about-turn regarding the GladAfrica scandal, conceding that the expenditure for the tender was in fact irregular, as stated by the Auditor General (AG). Tshwane member of the mayoral committee for finance Mare-Lise Fourie told News24 that around R317m spent on the GladAfrica tender had been found to be irregular. This was also conceded by Mosola. “The AG in accordance with his mandate expressed an opinion on the financial statements which concluded that the GladAfrica contract is irregular,” Fourie told News24. Engineering company GladAfrica and the City have been at the centre of allegations of tender irregularities since last year. It was reported that GladAfrica scored a R12bn deal to provide the City with project management support. Earlier this month, Mokgalapa vowed to become “Mr Service Delivery” who will act on the multibillion-rand GladAfrica saga. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.