Mohlalonga was sentenced – alongside former acting head of the Land Bank Philemon Mohlahlane and attorney Dinga Rammy Nkwashu – on Thurday at the Pretoria Specialised Commercial Crimes Court, the National Prosecuting Authority confirmed.  2 Mohlahlane was sentenced to seven years in prison, while attorney Nkwashu was sentenced to 24 years in prison. The three were found guilty in the same court in January 2018.  3 Mohlaloga, who was appointed chairperson of Icasa in December 2017, was found guilty of fraud and money laundering.  1 The court found that he and his co-accused defrauded the Land Bank of about R6m when he was chairperson of Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Agriculture.  8 He acted with his accomplices to transfer the money from the Land Bank to an attorney’s trust account.  1 Fin24 previously reported that Mohlaloga was appointed to the previous Icasa board in 2013, despite the fraud allegations.  5 He has served as acting chairperson of the Icasa board since 2016. He is also a former deputy president of the ANC Youth League and served as an ANC MP.  4 “An application for leave to appeal against the sentencing was granted for all three,” NPA regional spokesperson Phindi Mjonondwane said. The three were released on bail, pending the appeal.  1 Mohlaloga – a former ANC MP – was granted R70 000 bail, Mohlahlane R30 000 bail, and Nkwashu bail of R100 000. A Parliamentary process began in early 2018 to look into Mohlaloga’s fitness to hold office, pending his trial. In May 2018, the portfolio committee recommended that he be suspended, pending the finalisation of his case and his appeal. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.