 The hotel’s ideal location is perfect for visitors to Johannesburg looking to experience the best in retail and relaxation. Both the Rosebank Mall and the African Craft Market are just moments away and promise guests the best selection of up-market shopping and dining options. The central location also makes The Rosebank Crowne Plaza the ideal base to access famous Johannesburg tourist attractions such as the Apartheid Museum, Lion Park and Soweto. And for sports fans, the Coca Cola Park Stadium and Wanderers Cricket Ground are within a 10-minute drive from the hotel. Whether you are in Johannesburg on vacation or business, the Crowne Plaza Johannesburg – Rosebank offers the highest international standards throughout its accommodations that distinguish it as one of the top hotels in Johannesburg. MEETINGS & EVENTS IN ROSEBANK Accommodation & Event Spaces Under One Roof The hotel offers a selection of quiet and very well-equipped conference and event venues in Rosebank, Johannesburg that can accommodate 10 – 300 delegates. Crowne Plaza Johannesburg is one of the few establishments in Johannesburg that is able to host a conference of 300 delegates and offer accommodation all under one roof. All event venues in The Rosebank’s conference centre have digital signage for ease of location and are all equipped with the latest technologies, including WiFi internet access, audio visuals and video conferencing. The venue boasts a modern business centre that offers three work stations with full internet access as well as faxing, copying and scanning capabilities. Don’t think meetings, think experiences  Looking for a unique meeting experience? Inspire creativity with the hotel’s Carnival themed meetings. Combine fun with effective teamwork and goal-driven outcomes. Your meeting space will be transformed into a carnival complete with balloons and interactive activities during refreshment breaks such as games and cupcake decorating. At Crowne Plaza we pride ourselves on creating unique meeting experiences. ULTIMATE COMFORT ACCOMMODATION Crowne Plaza Johannesburg – The Rosebank includes a selection of 318 of the finest upmarket rooms and luxury suites in Johannesburg. This stunning Rosebank accommodation has been designed to the stringent Crowne Plaza standards to ensure the perfect night sleep. All beds are fitted with Chrysalis Linen mattress toppers and dressed with premium cotton bed linen. These standards combined with the Crowne Plaza Sleep Advantage Program ensure guests wake up refreshed and revived. The 24 luxury suites have spacious separate lounge areas and large workspaces. The suites offer lofty views of trendy, up-market Rosebank and establish the hotel’s position as one of the top hotels in Johannesburg. Hotel Reservations & Customer Contact Centre
+27 11 461 9744 | 0861 44 77 44
Crowne Plaza Johannesburg – The Rosebank Contacts
+27 11 448 3600  Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.