The improvement in the rate may reflect an increase in temporary jobs over the festive season, particularly in the retail industry, said Mamello Matikinca, the chief economist at FirstRand Ltd.’s First National Bank unit, in a note before the data release. At 109,000, the finance industry added the most jobs while community and social services, which include the government, cut 51,000 positions. Africa’s most-industrialized economy hasn’t grown by more than 2 percent a year since 2013, stifling job creation. Economists, including Investec Bank Ltd.’s Kamilla Kaplan, say gross domestic product must expand by 3 percent to 5 percent annually for the unemployment rate to recede. President Cyril Ramaphosa pledged growth of as much as 5 percent a year in his campaign for leadership of the ruling African National Congress. He used his state-of-the-nation-address last week to highlight deals brokered at a presidential jobs summit, which could create 275,000 jobs a year, and plans to focus on policies in labor intensive sectors. The South African Reserve Bank said the economy probably grew by 0.7 percent in 2018 after emerging from a recession in the third quarter. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.