Bosasa’s head office, owners and managers are under scrutiny from SARS’ newly established Illicit Economy Unit. A team of SARS officials entered Bosasa’s head office in Krugersdorp just after noon on Friday.   25 Bosasa has had a turbulent two months after former executive Angelo Agrizzi shone the spotlight on more than a decade’s alleged corruption and malfeasance at the company. Agrizzi testified in explicit detail about how state officials were corrupted in order for the company to get its way while keeping journalists and the justice sector at bay.   8 Earlier on Friday liquidator Cloete Murray held a staff meeting at the premises to inform the employees of the way forward, reports Kyle Cowan from News24.  3 Sars will conduct a broad tax investigation into all companies, directors and related parties, after concluding the necessary legal proceedings.  13 The Illicit Economy Unit is the same unit which executed two warrants at cigarette baron Adriano Mazzotti’s house on Wednesday in order to pay his preliminary debt of almost R34-million to the tax man.   16 The unit was still on the premises at the time this report was published. DM  10 Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.