The decision by the U.S., the U.K., Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland to send a memorandum to the presidency instead of communicating through the department is a “departure from diplomatic practice,” the department said in a statement on the government’s website Sunday. International Relations Minister Lindiwe Sisulu plans to meet the ambassadors to discuss protocol and the countries’ concerns, it said.  1 The Sunday Times newspaper reported that the five countries wrote a memo to Ramaphosa, stating they’re concerned about South Africa’s frequent changes to policies for industries including mining and the protection of intellectual property rights. The nations accounted for 57 percent of South Africa’s foreign direct investment by the end of 2017, central bank data show. The memo was written in June last year, and didn’t represent a breach of diplomatic protocol because it merely set down talking points, wasn’t signed by them and was shared with many government officials, the Daily Maverick reported Monday, citing diplomats it didn’t identify. South Africa began an inquiry into state corruption last year after Ramaphosa became president and promised to root out graft. He also pledged to raise $100 billion in investment to boost a sluggish economy and employment. While many people have been named in the corruption probe, there have been no arrests. DM  1 Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.