“During the operation in Ekurhuleni West Cluster, 66 suspects were arrested for various crimes ranging from dealing in drugs, murder, rape, domestic violence, possession of unlicensed firearms and drunken driving,” Gauteng police spokesperson Captain Kay Makhubele said in a statement on Sunday. An additional 156 suspects were arrested on the West Rand following roadblocks at several hot spots. “The suspects were arrested for crimes such as possession of unlicensed firearms, rape, murder and ten (10) liquor outlets were closed,” he explained. Around 400 suspects were nabbed in operations conducted in the Ekurhuleni Central and the Soweto East clusters, while police officers arrested 278 more suspected criminals in the Johannesburg West Cluster for various crimes, including fraud, possession of drugs, rape, murder, and driving under the influence of alcohol. The Tshwane West Cluster saw twenty suspects arrested for the possession 2000 counterfeit goods. “As these joint operations gain momentum, the authority of the state are reclaiming the streets of Johannesburg and counterfeit goods worth of millions of rand were confiscated,” Makhubele concluded. The arrested suspects are expected to appear in various magistrates’ courts over the next 48 hours. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.