The first-person shooter game, which was released in November, faced heavy competition during the holiday season. Fortnite and Red Dead Redemption 2 in particular vied for customers’ attention, Chief Financial Officer Blake Jorgensen said in an interview. “It’s always a battle, for time more than a battle for money,” he said. Adjusted revenue for the quarter ending in March will be $1.17 billion, EA said on Tuesday, compared with the $1.47 billion average of analysts’ estimates. Last quarter’s sales and earnings also fell short of Wall Street estimates. Upgrades to the Battlefield game are coming, including a Fortnite-style battle-royale mode, but they won’t come in time to save the current quarter. It’s no secret that the industry is going through a period of upheaval as gamers forgo console games and embrace battle-royale titles like Fortnite. But the pace of decline in EA’s packaged goods was still eye-opening, with net revenue down 15 percent to $1.55 billion in the 12 months that ended in December. EA shares fell as low as $74.71 in late trading after the results were released. The stock had gained 17 percent this year. The holiday season is a critical period for video-game makers, and investors are eagerly awaiting how other companies fared. Take-Two Interactive Software Inc., the maker of Grand Theft Auto, reports its earnings Wednesday morning. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.