Police spokesperson Captain Kay Makhubele said the alleged drug was well-known and was arrested in the early hours of Saturday morning. “The management of police in Gauteng has welcomed the arrest of the known drug dealer. An intelligence-driven operation led police to the residence of the suspect and to a self-storage facility in Silverton, Pretoria where police, with the help of yet another K9 hero, “Angel”, found 56 bags of heroin with an estimated weight of 5.6kg. The estimated value of the drugs was more than R700 000, pending forensic determination.” Makhubele said the suspect will be charged with possession of and dealing in drugs. “This suspect is one of the 601 suspects arrested in various operations conducted at the Tshwane district. The suspects were arrested for crimes ranging from murder, rape possessions of stolen property and other cases. “Drug infestation in communities has become a serious concern for the police and hence the adoption of the fight against the scourge as one of the provincial commissioner’s priorities,” he said. Meanwhile, police in Ekurhuleni arrested 181 suspects during stop and search operations, raiding of wanted suspects and patrols at the hotspots. Makhubele said the suspects were arrested for drunk and driving, assault common, robbery, malicious damage to property and theft. In the Johannesburg district, 99 suspects were arrested during various operations and counterfeit goods were confiscated. Makhubele said a total number of arrested suspects was 881. The suspects will be appearing at various Gauteng Magistrate’s Courts in due course. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.