Mti appeared in the Specialised Commercial Crimes Court in Pretoria on Thursday for corruption after he handed himself over to police. The prosecutor said Mti flew from the Eastern Cape on Thursday morning. “He came at his own accord. The State does not have any reason to oppose bail,” he said. His case was postponed to March 27. On Wednesday, the Hawks arrested several people in connection with allegations of corruption, money laundering and fraud. The arrests include former Bosasa COO Angelo Agrizzi, former correctional services CFO Patrick Gillingham, Bosasa official Andries van Tonder, fomer Bosasa senior manager Frans Vorster and current Bosasa staff member, Carlos Bonafacio. Three companies are also included in the charge sheet, namely African Global Operations (formerly Bosasa); Sondolo IT and Phezulu Fencing, according to court papers. The five accused were granted R20 000 bail each. They are also scheduled to appear in court again on March 27. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.