Trump remains popular with about 80 percent of the GOP base and that should be enough to cut off any serious attempt to run against him in the Republican primaries, Christie said Monday on Bloomberg Television. “That doesn’t leave you a whole lot of room to challenge him,” Christie said. “If those numbers change then there will obviously be people who look at it. Because there are always ambitious people who want to run for president of the United States.” But he added, “I don’t see a landing strip for them.” Fifty-five percent of the public disapproves of the job Trump is doing, according to the average of recent polls compiled by RealClear Politics. Christie also repeated his assertion that Trump’s White House is a “Game of Thrones Operation” that hasn’t served the president well. He said that’s partly the result of decisions by Trump’s advisers to discard the transition effort he’d led. “I’m a subscriber to the garbage-in garbage-out theory of management, and if you’re giving him bad choices he can’t possibly make good ones and if he does it’s just lucky,” Christie said. “A lot of the folks who they put in front of him, didn’t belong being in front of him.” In the Democratic nomination race, Christie said his state’s junior Democratic senator, Cory Booker, will be a “credible” candidate in 2020. As New Jersey governor, Christie worked with Booker while he was the mayor of Newark. In 2010, Booker partnered with Christie when Facebook Inc. co-founder Mark Zuckerberg announced he’d donate $100 million to Newark’s struggling, state-run schools. The two again teamed up to modify teacher tenure rules and expand charter schools in the city. “We have a friendship,” Christie, who is promoting his memoir “Let Me Finish,” said of Booker. “He has a legitimate chance, but I won’t be doing any endorsement and it won’t be hard for me me to say I’m with the president.” Booker is among more than a dozen Democrats who’ve announced they will vie for the chance to challenge Trump or are considering bids. The field so far includes Senators Kamala Harris of California, Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Kirsten Gillibrand, Hawaii Representative Tulsi Gabbard, former San Antonio Mayor and Obama administration cabinet official Julian Castro and South Bend, Indiana, Mayor Pete Buttigieg. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.