Photo:  Alex Christians (LinkedIn profile) The DA’s Chair of Chairs, Alex Christians, who holds a senior position in the Johannesburg council and is also a councillor in Ward 58 (which includes Mayfair, Fordsburg and Pageview), has been found to have facilitated the hijacking of a sports facility, which City officials wanted to run as a public benefit, for the use of the private school called Task Academy.  2 Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba on Thursday gave the ANC 48 hours to retract a press statement on the issue but the mayor has not yet commented on what action he will take after the anti-corruption agency he launched, Group Forensic and Investigation Services (GFIS), found his councillor guilty of a range of serious charges.  5 The GFIS report found that Christians’ conduct had cost the City over R2-million as the Task Academy did not pay its utility bills. The facility is now also a prostitution den which Daily Maverick featured in the story about Condom Park and it has fallen into an advanced state of disrepair. The 130-page report in the possession of Daily Maverick shows how Christians repeatedly intervened with council officials to secure the Mayfair Bowling Club and sports facility for the Task Academy although the Johannesburg Development Agency had recommended that it be run as a public facility. Also on Daily Maverick ANC quash Sol Plaatje rebellion in latest round of by-elections The true cost of load shedding in rands and cents – and life and death The DA pattern in Ward 58 is to arrogate public resources and public land for private interests. The Task Academy turned a multimillion-rand profit when it moved out of its previous premises in Pageview, Johannesburg, and sold it on to Gauteng Coaches for a small fortune. It has now put up shop in the sports facility in what councillors call a “hijacking”.  1 “During the process of approving the report, Task Academy had already occupied the facility without any approval. Task Academy had occupied the Facility without an approved lease agreement from JPC (the Johannesburg Property Company)…,” reads the report. The report finds that Christians is in violation of the code of conduct for not protecting the credibility and integrity of the Council, for using confidential information obtained as a councillor for personal gain, of interfering in the management or administration of the council, for giving illegal instructions to employees of the council, and of obstructing or attempting to obstruct the implementation of a decision of the council. GFIS investigated a complaint by community members who detailed lengthy allegations of deception, collusion and overreaching by Christians, who is not from the area and who treats residents with disdain, as a six-months-long community-led investigation by Daily Maverick has shown. Ward 58 is in an advanced state of failure, as our investigation has shown. It was alleged by anonymous whistle-blowers that the councillor had received R800,000 from the Task Academy, but the GFIS investigators could find no evidence of this, and a lifestyle audit of Christians showed that his spending matched his income.  1 Christians failed to respond to requests for comment on Thursday. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider. Related ANC quash Sol Plaatje rebellion in latest round of by-elections The true cost of load shedding in rands and cents – and life and death ‘We live like peasants in our own country’ – tales from the forgotten people of South Africa Coalition of corruption has again led to killings  in Nelson Mandela Bay No pay: Annual admin snarl-ups hit junior doctors on community service Cosatu marches against Eskom restructuring and possible retrenchments Explore Daily Maverick The impact of Nenegate: No, You can’t simply pick up a plunging rand Ramaphosa an Achilles’ heel for the ANC going into election – and their only hope Robert McBride’s Zondo Commission testimony could be a depth charge into the heart of collusion, corruption and State Capture Former Mozambican finance minister won’t be extradited to US, Sisulu announces The five best reasons not to believe in God The Zuma power elite is alive, kicking and preparing to replace Ramaphosa