Photo: Gordon Wright The sweetness from the veg comes through deliciously and is superbly balanced out by the umami goodness from the caramelisation and balsamic vinegar. Try to use the best balsamic vinegar you can afford, the thicker and stickier the better. Caramelised Vegetable & Balsamic Bake Serves 4-6 2 x red onions 1 handful of green beans 4 x carrots 4 x baby marrows 4 x baby gem squash 2 x large brown mushrooms 250g sugar snap peas 4 x cloves garlic Large sprig of thyme Salt and pepper to taste A generous glug of olive oil A few crushed and dried chillies to add a tiny bit of heat (optional) Peel and roughly chop/quarter the veg. Sprinkle with olive oil, salt and pepper and toss to give a good coating. Pop all the veggies in an oven roasting dish and bake at 220oC for about 45 minutes, Larger veg, like butternut, potatoes, sweet potatoes and so on, will take a bit longer. I do find that a slightly hotter oven allows for the caramelisation process to occur easily and the veg to crisp up nicely and go golden brown. Shake the pan well after about 30 minutes and add the fast-cooking veg. Once ready, gently toss through a bit of olive oil, drizzle with the balsamic and serve. Goes fabulously with most meat dishes or even on its own. Frozen Hazelnut Nougat  Makes 6-8 servings This cold dessert is one of my favourites of all time, rich, crunchy and decadent yet beautifully soft, smooth and sort of ice creamy. I like to offset the sweetness with some granadilla (passion fruit). Just a small scoop of fresh pulp on top and that tartness contrasts and yet complements this dessert perfectly. It was one of the most popular in my old restaurant and certainly my No 1. You need to make this in three separate parts and blend them together. Makes 6-8 servings Caramelised hazelnuts 80g x hazelnuts 80g x castor sugar Place the sugar in a heavy pan and heat, add the hazelnuts and mix until the hazelnuts are caramelised and the mixture is a beautiful golden colour. Pour out on a heat-resistant surface and allow to cool. Set aside. (Be very careful as this mixture is incredibly hot and can easily burn you quite badly if spilled.) Nougat 6 x egg whites 250g x castor sugar 375ml cream ½ t x vanilla essence Mix the egg whites and the castor sugar in a double boiler. Whisk continuously until the mixture is warm and fluffy. Remove from the heat and whisk until cool, but still fluffy. Roughly crush up the caramelised hazelnuts with a meat mallet or suitable bashing device. Whisk the cream until stiff. Fold in the whipped cream, caramelised hazelnuts and egg white mixture and mix well. Place the mixture into freezable containers (you can use old ice cream containers) and freeze overnight. Serve big scoops on a hot sunny day with a nice bit of granadilla pulp on top. You’ll be the most popular person in the neighbourhood. DM Gordon Wright is the author of Karoo Food and Veld to Fork.  Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.