Pomegranate Fizz. Styling by Nikita Singh
Photographer: Justin Govender Mixology has progressed since the Sex and the City style cosmopolitans of the Nineties. Pink and ruby drinks don’t have to be sweet. They can have notes of bitterness, acidity, and complex layers of flavour. In the spirit of amore, serve a luscious rosy cocktail to complement any meal. Keep it cool Julian Short, owner of concealed bar Sin + Tax in Rosebank, says the secret to a good cocktail is balance and temperature. “Water and ice are important ingredients that people often forget,” he says. For example, drinks that require more dilution would have crushed ice as opposed to big ice cubes. Short’s favourite cocktail at the moment is a Boulevardier – basically a negroni with bourbon instead of gin. Big ice cubes are used to retain the flavour and intensity of the bourbon. Boulevardier Serves 2 Combine bourbon, Campari, and vermouth in a cocktail shaker. Fill with ice and shake vigorously for 20 seconds. Strain into two rocks glasses with just one or two large ice cubes. Garnish with an orange peel twist. Meal pairing: Charcuterie and cheese board Short says digestif-style cocktails (drinks with amaro or vermouth) can be paired with rich food. They cut through the richness without detracting from the flavour of the meal. Master the basics, then get experimental Workshop 55, a tapas and cocktail bar in Parktown North, specialises in gin infusions, but their expert bartenders can design a cocktail to suit any palate. Siyabonga Dumisa, a mixologist at Workshop 55, will recommend a gin based on your personal taste: sweet, citrus, spicy, or herbaceous. “I prefer using my nose, I pick gins better when I smell them. You pick up more on the nose than the palate,” says Dumisa. Dumisa explains that classic cocktails are built according to a 2:1:1 ratio. Specifically: 2 parts spirit : 1 part liqueur : 1 part citrus or sugar syrup. Take a basic margarita, for example: 2 parts tequila : 1 part Cointreau : 1 part lime juice. Once you have the balance right, you can start adjusting and adding a twist to traditional recipes. A paloma, the blushing cousin of the traditional margarita, includes fresh grapefruit juice and soda water for a refreshing twist. Paloma Serves 2 Combine grapefruit juice, lime juice and sugar in two tall glasses and stir until the sugar has dissolved. Stir in tequila, add ice cubes, and top off with soda water. Garnish with lime. Meal pairing: Tapas, like spicy chorizo and patatas bravas Citrus based drinks cut through rich, spicy food and act as a palate cleaser. The citrus in the cocktail complement the lemon and lime often used in Spanish and Mexican cuisines. “People used to say you drink red wine with meat, but it’s not like that any more. There’s no rule of thumb any more,” says Workshop 55 owner Gary Soalheiro. You can pair any liquor with food, but make sure the additional flavours and garnishes don’t overpower the taste of the spirit. “Orange peel complements and brings out the aromas in a whiskey,” says Dumisa. A garnish is used for its visual appeal, flavour, and aroma. A garnish isn’t just a pretty flower on a drink, it should play a sensory role in completing the cocktail. In a pomegranate gin fizz, the ruby jewels look beautiful, but they also add a tart burst of flavour when bitten into. Pomegranate Gin Fizz Serves 2 An affordable dry, bubbly drink. In a small jug, mix gin and pomegranate juice and pour into two coup glasses. Top up with prosecco and garnish with pomegranate seeds. Meal pairing: Creamy seafood linguine Prosecco pairs well with seafood and shellfish. A good dry Prosecco is light-bodied and slightly acidic, to complement the delicate flavours of fresh seafood. DM Food stylist: Nikita Singh Photographer: Justin Govender Boulevardier. Food stylist: Nikita Singh. Paloma. Food stylist: Nikita Singh. Pomegranate Fizz. Styling by Nikita Singh Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.