Crowds took to the streets of the town, causing N2 traffic to be diverted. “The protest is over; the problem was electricity,” Bitou municipal official Michael Mangane told News24. He said that protesters complained that they received too few electricity units for R60.  1 Earlier, traffic officials diverted traffic as protesters stoned vehicles on the N2. “The N2 between KwaNokuthula and the N2 Shell garage is closed due to the turnout of the protesters. Traffic is being diverted via Wittedrift and the Airport Road but it is flowing,” said Western Cape Traffic Chief Kenny Africa. He added that the situation remained tense and protesters were burning tyres. There were no reports of injuries or arrests. Efforts to contact Mayor M Peter Lobese and deputy mayor Sandiso Gcabayi were unsuccessful. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.