The measures, taking effect March 13, extend the current 1-kilometer no-fly zone for unmanned and model aircraft, the Department for Transport said in a statement Wednesday. Police will also gain new stop-and-search powers to help clamp down on violations. “The law is clear that flying a drone near an airport is a serious criminal act,” Transport Secretary Chris Grayling said in the release. “We’re now going even further and extending the no-fly zone to help keep our airports secure.” Recklessly endangering an aircraft can mean a five-year prison term, rising to a potential life sentence for intentional acts of violence. The government is drawing up a Drones Bill to grant police additional powers, such as the right to access electronic data stored on a drone without the need for a search warrant. Operators of drones weighing more than 20 kilograms (44 pounds) must register as of Nov. 30 and take an online competency test. The Home Office, meanwhile, is reviewing its approach to countering the malicious use of drones to protect critical infrastructure, including testing technology to disrupt their operation. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.