Batohi arrived in Pretoria four days ago from the International Criminal Court (ICC), where she worked previously, and held a joint press briefing with Justice Minister Michael Masutha on Friday – her first day on the job. The incoming NPA head had a message to anyone involved in corrupt activities – both within the state and the private sector.  56 “Corruption is driven by greed and selfishness. In certain contexts, when public institutions are corrupted, it amounts to theft from ordinary South Africans just trying to make ends meet.  57 “We need to ensure that money goes where it was intended. I commit to leading an organisation that has the courage and the ability to end this damaging state of affairs.  32 “Perpetrators of crime and corruption within the state and private sector, regardless of who you are, where you are, how rich you are, your days of acting with impunity are numbered.”  58 State capture allegations will receive ‘immediate’ attention  25 Batohi acknowledged that the road was dark, saying she was under no illusions about the task at hand. “We know it is difficult, but we are determined,” Batohi said.  5 “I return to the NPA at a time of crisis, not only for the organisation, but for the rule of law in South Africa. Without it, the country is on a slippery slope, and the cancer of impunity festers and grows…  78 “But despite these challenges, I am really confident that the NPA will become an organisation that puts justice first and one we can all be proud of…”  3 She said the organisation also needed more capacity to deliver. She would work tirelessly with government counterparts to ensure the NPA was effective. “I know that everyone out there is hungry about justice. You have every right to be. Serious allegations have emerged, some old, some new, but all damaging if they have been found to have any basis in fact. “What is emerging is distressing in the extreme and will receive immediate attention from me and my team.”  7 ‘Prosecutors are not for sale’  42 She also hinted that compromised members of the NPA would have no place at the institution under her leadership.  100 “There is a dark cloud hanging over the NPA. The NPA needs a change in leadership, ones that prosecutors and all South Africans can be proud of.”  2 She told NPA staff in her first meeting that she offered her loyalty to those who wanted to uphold the Constitution.  24 “Importantly however, members of the NPA who are unwilling to work as professionals with integrity, do not have a future at the organisation. Prosecutors are not for sale.”  66 She also thanked members of the media, civil society, and the public for bringing the country “back from the edge of state of capture”. “We will take it from here as the NPA,” she promised. ‘I will take it to the Constitutional Court if needs be’  1 Answering questions, Batohi said she had spoken to President Cyril Ramaphosa about protecting the NPA’s independence. In a meeting shortly after her appointment, she said she put the question to Ramaphosa. “I did have a conversation with the president, and I said to him, ‘I know it’s guaranteed in the Constitution, but I want you to give me that assurance.’  2 “Unhesitatingly, the president said there would be no political interference into the work of the NPA. So I feel fairly confident that that won’t happen.  7 “Who knows what’s going to happen in the future, and if it does, I will fiercely defend it and I will take it to the Constitutional Court if needs be.” DM  88 Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.