At a snap press conference in London, the members of Parliament stood up one by one to explain why they have resigned in protest at Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership of the Labour Party. They will now sit in a new “Independent Group” and are aiming to become a new force in U.K. political debate. The split has been rumored for months, but with less than six weeks until the U.K. is due to leave the European Union, Corbyn’s failure to take a decisive stand against Theresa May’s Brexit policy proved to be the “tipping point” for many in the group. Chuka Umunna, Labour’s former chief business spokesman, said the mainstream political parties cannot be the answer and urged other politicians with doubts to join the new grouping. There has been speculation that some Conservatives will also split away from May’s party. “Politics is broken, it doesn’t have to be this way, let’s change it,” Umunna told reporters at the press conference on Monday morning. “The established parties are simply not up the challenge. They can’t be the change because they have become the problem.” Corbyn was ready for the announcement when it came. “I am disappointed that these MPs have felt unable to continue to work together for the Labour policies that inspired millions at the last election and saw us increase our vote by the largest share since 1945,” the Labour leader said in a statement. He accused the Tories of “bungling Brexit” and insisted he had set out “a unifying and credible” alternative plan. “Now more than ever is the time to bring people together to build a better future for us all,” he said. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.