The summit was organized in Hanoi in haste after Trump announced the meeting on Feb. 8, and the White House has sought to lower expectations. Possible outcomes include a joint declaration that the U.S. and North Korea are no longer at war, a nonbinding agreement that wouldn’t officially replace the 1953 armistice that ended the Korean War. The two leaders are expected to sign a joint agreement at about 2:00 p.m. Hanoi time, and Trump plans to hold a news conference at about 4:00 p.m. before departing for Washington, where domestic politics have distracted from his summit. His former personal lawyer, Michael Cohen, accused the president of financial misdeeds in testimony to a House committee on Wednesday. President Donald Trump said he’s in no rush for North Korea to give up its nuclear arms and tamped down expectations for his second summit with Kim Jong Un, saying that over the long term the talks would be a success. “I can’t speak necessarily to today,” Trump said as the summit began. Over the longer term, “we’re going to have a fantastic success,” he said. “Speed’s not that important to me,” Trump added. “No rush. We just want to do the right deal.” For the first known time, Kim answered a question from a U.S. reporter among the journalists gathered to watch the opening of the summit. He was asked if he was confident, and Kim said in Korean: “My hunch says good results will come out.” “There are people remaining skeptical about this meeting,” Kim said in introductory remarks. “All of them will be watching this moment together as if they are watching a fantasy movie.” “Let me assure you I will do all my best to bring a good result ultimately,” he added. Trump and Kim are conducting their talks at Hanoi’s historic Sofitel Legend Metropole hotel. After a private meeting, they’re expected to walk to a table near the hotel’s swimming pool and join aides including U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.