U.K. government bonds and the FTSE 100 Index slipped as Prime Minister Theresa May is set to address Parliament on the next steps in the Brexit process following reports she is considering a deadline extension. The opposition Labour party, meanwhile, came out in favor of a second vote on whether the U.K. should leave the European Union. “There is excitement that a second referendum has become more likely which would open the possibility of canceling Brexit,” said Lee Hardman, an analyst at MUFG. “We still think it is unlikely but we are just seeing initial market response which could be pared back over time.” Sterling jumped almost 1 percent to 85.88 pence per euro, the strongest level since May 2017, before paring the gain to about 0.7 percent. Against the dollar, it climbed as much as 1.1 percent to $1.3238, the highest since October. The yield on U.K. 10-year bonds rose three basis points to 1.21 percent. The FTSE 100 Index of shares was down 1.1 percent. Pound’s Win Is U.K. Stocks’ Loss on Reduced No-Deal Brexit Risk The U.K. currency was further boosted as Bank of England Governor Mark Carney and fellow policy makers testified in front of a parliamentary committee. Their comments on inflation suggested the BOE sees price growth staying above target regardless of the Brexit outcome, giving sterling another lift, according to Neil Jones, head of hedge fund sales at Mizuho Bank Ltd. The pound would rally much more should a second referendum be confirmed, than on a delay to Brexit, according to a survey of strategists conducted by Bloomberg last month. Still, it’s harder to see a way to reach this outcome whereas the EU has already said it would consider allowing the U.K. more time to negotiate. The prime minister is set to make an announcement to Parliament at 12:30 p.m. With lawmakers due to vote on May’s Brexit motion on Wednesday, she may make a clear promise to avoid no-deal in order to avoid rebellion in her own party. The market will welcome any development that reduces the risk of a crash exit, but further pound strength could be limited, according to strategists at Royal Bank of Canada and Nomura International Plc. A Brexit delay is already largely priced into the exchange rate, according to RBC strategist Adam Cole, while Nomura International’s Jordan Rochester said the bank had been hearing from clients that longer-term investors aren’t buying into the rally and likely won’t until May’s deal is done. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.