Delivering judgment, Judge Fayeeza Kathree-Setiloane said the applicants were entitled to relief and to reinstate the disbanded PEC. This comes after the disbanded North West PEC approached the High Court to overturn the decision made by the ANC’s national executive committee (NEC). Former North West ANC chairperson Supra Mahumapelo, represented by advocate Dali Mpofu, claimed the decision by the NEC wasn’t “impartial”. Other applicants include party member Kutlwano Masibi, who is represented by advocate Tembeka Ngcukaitobi. Mahumapelo in his heads of arguments supported the relief that Masina and other applicants were seeking, News24 earlier reported. Mahumapelo previously argued that the NEC used a self-defeating argument to dissolve the PEC. “If the branches have been dysfunctional since 2016, as alleged by the ANC, there could be no valid national conference because such branches should not have passed the audit process,” Mahumapelo argued in his court documents. He further accused the NEC of breaching the party’s constitution and membership audit guidelines. “No explanation or justification was furnished for these serious breaches, which adversely affected members of the party,” he said. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.