“I think Bernie did an incredible service for this country in his campaign in 2016, and it fundamentally changed the debate,” de Blasio said of the Vermont senator during a news conference in Brooklyn on Tuesday. “I think we’re in a new situation here. There’s obviously a different dynamic, and I think everyone should assess the current situation we’re in.” In 2016, de Blasio attracted wide attention when he delayed endorsing Hillary Clinton for several months in her race against Sanders for the Democratic presidential nomination, even though de Blasio had served as campaign manager during her 2000 election to the U.S. Senate, and had worked in former President Bill Clinton’s administration. In 2014, the former president swore in de Blasio to start his first term as mayor. Sanders, 77, on Tuesday announced a second White House bid, saying one of his primary motivations is to oust President Donald Trump. Since Trump’s defeat of Clinton, de Blasio has traveled at least three times for well-publicized visits with Sanders, who swore in the mayor for his second term. De Blasio said he wants to nationally promote the policies he has pushed as mayor, such as universal pre-kindergarten, two weeks paid vacation for all, and reducing crime while trying to improve police-community relations. “I do not rule out any particular path for myself,” de Blasio said when asked by reporters whether he’s considering his own run for the presidency. Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support. Please sign in or create an account to view the comments. To join the conversation, sign up as a Maverick Insider.