Judge Raymond Zondo, who is chairing the panel probing graft particularly during Jacob Zuma’s presidency, granted the postponement of the testimony of Robert McBride, the head of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate, on Thursday following a request from evidence leader. The panel first focused on allegations that members of the wealthy Gupta family used their close relationship with Zuma and other officials to loot state companies — allegations they deny. Testimony by Angelo Agrizzi, the former chief operating officer of services company Bosasa, has also implicated a number of other senior politicians and officials, indicating that the problem was far more widespread and could further damage the ruling African National Congress’s reputation ahead of elections scheduled for May. The commission, now in its sixth month, earlier heard testimony from former Member of Parliament Dennis Bloem and Erna Wiese, an architectural expert with the Department of Public Works, who spoke about a report compiled after the department visited the Guptas’ home in Saxonwold, Johannesburg. DM Are You A South AfriCAN or a South AfriCAN'T? Maverick Insider is more than a reader revenue scheme. While not quite a "state of mind", it is a mindset: it's about believing that independent journalism makes a genuine difference to our country and it's about having the will to support that endeavour. From the #GuptaLeaks into State Capture to the Scorpio exposés into SARS, Daily Maverick investigations have made an enormous impact on South Africa and it's political landscape. As we enter an election year, our mission to Defend Truth has never been more important. A free press is one of the essential lines of defence against election fraud; without it, national polls can turn very nasty, very quickly as we have seen recently in the Congo. If you would like a practical, tangible way to make a difference in South Africa consider signing up to become a Maverick Insider. You choose how much to contribute and how often (monthly or annually) and in exchange, you will receive a host of awesome benefits. The greatest benefit of all (besides inner peace)? Making a real difference to a country that needs your support.