 Pilots at BA, which is owned by IAG, voted for strike action on pay earlier this month, and the airline’s bid to bring a High Court injunction to stop it failed. “The Court of Appeal has today rightly dismissed BA’s attempt to injunct this industrial action on a technicality,” said general secretary of the pilots’ union BALPA, Brian Strutton. “BALPA wants to resolve this matter through negotiation and so we are not announcing strike dates. Instead, we have called on BA to hold further talks at (conciliation service) ACAS and they have agreed to meet at ACAS today and for the rest of this week for one last try to resolve this dispute by negotiation,” he said in a statement. BA said it was “disappointed that the pilots’ union, BALPA, has chosen to threaten the holidays of thousands of our customers this summer with unprecedented strike action.” It said in a statement that its proposed pay deal of 11.5 percent over three years was fair but “we continue to pursue every avenue to find a solution to avoid industrial action and protect our customers’ travel plans.” (Reporting by Elizabeth Piper; editing by Stephen Addison) In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.