Pan Macmillan/Composite: The Reading List Pinch of Nom contains 100 home-style recipes, 33 of which are vegetarian. The recipes are aimed at both novice and experienced home-cooks, and the food is so delicious you’ll never guess the calorie count. Our featured recipe is a burger – yes, a veggie one. You can’t beat a good veggie burger. The very best are substantial and tasty and, if you’re a meat-eater, you don’t even miss the meat. The addition of a small amount of Parmesan gives these burgers a fantastic sharp, rich taste. Serve with a large salad and enjoy! Veggie Burgers: serves 4; 118 kcal per serving Ingredients 220g medium potatoes, peeled and diced Low-calorie cooking spray 2 garlic cloves, crushed 1 medium carrot, grated 50g green beans, trimmed and finely chopped 50g cauliflower florets, finely chopped 50g broccoli florets, finely chopped 50g frozen peas 50g sweetcorn kernels (tinned and drained, or frozen) Handful of fresh parsley, chopped 30g Parmesan (or vegetarian hard cheese) To serve (optional) 4 wholemeal burger buns Lettuce leaves Sweet Potato Rostis with Sour Cream and Chive Dip Instructions Kate Allinson and Kay Featherstone owned a restaurant together in The Wirral, in North West England, where Kate was head chef. Together they created the Pinch of Nom blog with the aim of teaching people how to cook. They began sharing healthy, slimming recipes and today Pinch of Nom is the UK’s most-visited food blog with an active and engaged online community of over 1.5 million followers. Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including recipes! – daily. In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.