By Christian Radnedge The defending champions reached their third successive final by overcoming England 2-1 in a hard-fought game in Lyon which included the European side having a goal ruled out for offside and U.S. goalkeeper Alyssa Naeher saving a penalty. It was the third consecutive match the U.S. had won 2-1, using impressive game-management skills to see out the contests and frustrate their opponents where in previous tournaments they had become used to simply blowing teams away. The gritty performances have been a far cry from the opening matches where the Americans thrashed Thailand 13-0 and put three goals past Chile without reply. Ellis said that in the knockout rounds her players had been forced to tap into their ingrained tenacity. “I told the players I think this is the hardest route to a final a team has probably ever taken in terms of level of competition,” Ellis told a news conference. “But they find a way and I attribute that to the mental strength of the culture, the environment, the history of the nation and I think they are vetted in pressure and you saw that tonight. “It’s resolve and it’s fantastic — games where you have to have that… it’s the World Cup finals, it’s not Sunday soccer. As a coach you rely on players having that mental capacity and that’s through creating a coaching environment that makes it as competitive.” Part of what has set the United States apart in the past has been their deep well of talent. The nation has dominated women’s soccer, winning a record three World Cups and four Olympic gold medals. They were without key winger Megan Rapinoe on Tuesday, who scored four goals in the previous two matches but suffered a hamstring strain, but Christen Press took her place seamlessly by scoring the opener and played a part in setting up Alex Morgan’s winner. “Pressy’s been fantastic. I’ve said this, I have multiple stars in multiple positions,” Ellis said. “Everybody gets the same attention from the coaching staff because we say to them ‘when that moment comes, play like you’re going to make the difference’ and Pressy sure did that.” Standing in the way of the U.S. winning a fourth World Cup out of eight editions of the tournament will either be Sweden or the Netherlands who face each other on Wednesday for a place in Sunday’s final. Ellis was looking forward to having a night off to watch what she said would be another great occasion. “The Netherlands have had a great tournament, obviously coming off the Euros, tremendous performances by them. Sweden we obviously saw in the group stage and we know how good they are. I think that’s going to be an epic match tomorrow.” (Reporting by Christian Radnedge; editing by Clare Fallon) In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.