Malema, 38, brought the case after being charged under the Riotous Assemblies Act for urging his party’s supporters to seize vacant land. He and the EFF, the country’s second-largest opposition party, challenged the law saying it was passed during white-minority rule to oppress black people, and now plan to take the argument to the Constitutional Court, the highest legal authority.  3 The election of Nelson Mandela’s African National Congress effectively ended apartheid in 1994, nearly four decades after the Act took effect. The legislation prohibits gatherings in open-air public places if the Minister of Justice considers they could endanger the public peace and was used to try prosecute Mandela, and other anti-apartheid icons including Oliver Tambo and Walter Sisulu. DM  1 In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.  1