“I received the first report at about 06:00 that municipal bus drivers had parked their vehicles and left with their keys,” Tshwane Metro Police Department (TMPD) spokesperson Isaac Mahamba told News24 on Monday. “We are engaging the City bus manager to find ways to move the buses, as the original keys are not here,” he added. The strike action has affected every street leading into the CBD, Mahamba said. “This includes your Francis Baard, Madiba, Lilian Ngoyi and Sisulu streets,” he explained. EWN reported that the drivers, affiliated to the South African Municipal Workers’ Union (Samwu), were seeking an 18% increase. MMC for Roads and Transport Sheila Senkubuge told News24 that the City was aware the protest would be going ahead. However, measures put in place at the depot, where the buses were parked, had not prevented workers from taking the vehicles out. “We were informed last week about the wages strike, but what we are seeing now is opportunistic elements, where drivers decided to use the municipal property. “We are constantly engaging Samwu, and we have no issues with the strike, but what is unacceptable is to use the municipality’s property to inconvenience the entire City,” she told News24. Metro police, who were busy diverting traffic from the CBD, could not confirm when the affected roads would be open again. News24 In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.