FEDUSA and its affiliate UNTU marched to Parliament on 26 July 2019, calling for the deployment of the army to the railway service. Photo: Aisha Abdool Karim “We need South African National Defence Force (SANDF) deployment,” said George le Roux, the Western Cape national organiser from United National Transport Union (UNTU). The union and its mother body Fedusa held a nationwide one-day strike on Friday to ask for assistance straight from the President to deploy troops to the embattled rail network. The Fedusa-led strike march in Cape Town was only attended by 40 members, but their message was clear: Mr Fix It, transport minister Fikile Mbalula must fix the train service during his first 100 days in office while the President, as Commander in Chief of the SANDF must deploy personnel to the rail service to stabilise crime on South Africa’s railway network. Le Roux said that there was no safety and security on trains, stating, “once your infrastructure collapses, there is no service”. Le Roux stated that was no proper support for Prasa and its problems, and it was “common knowledge of the money that was plundered through Lucky Montana” could have been used for security upgrades at the State-Owned Entity. Due to a lack of security, the union wants the army to stabilise security and crime on the network, then training, as announced by minister Mbalula this week, can commence, le Roux told Daily Maverick. Read in Daily Maverick: Mbalula promises safer rail transport on eve of train drivers’ strike. While marchers walked to Parliament, they shouted: “it’s not Metrorail, its Metrofail” and “we are coming minister, we are coming minister for you. When are you coming to fix the railway?” At Parliament, Riefdah Ajam, Fedusa’s deputy general said: “our people are dying, our people are raped on the railway, our people are assaulted on our railway every day.” Ajam said that not only was the group marching on behalf of more than half a million workers across the country, “but for commuters here in Cape Town”. In Cape Town, the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa’s) spokesperson Nana Zenani said in a statement: “Western Cape is operating a normal weekday service with minimal cancellations. Some delays due to usual operational challenges including vandalism, manual authorisations and speed restrictions.” She said the union wants safe, reliable and accessible transport for commuters and drivers. In addition to the SANDF deployment, some of Fedusa and UNTU’s demands are: At Parliament, the Department of Transport’s chief director responsible for rail, Mkhacani Godfrey Maluleke, told the group “we are going to take your demands seriously” and said the department would get back to the union within 30 days. The 30 days – and the end of Mbalula’s first 100 days in office  – will be around the end of August. Ajam, however, said if the department does not meet these demands, they would return to Parliament. Meanwhile, Bheki Simelane reports from Gauteng that Midway Station –  which feeds the rail between Johannesburg and Vereeniging –  was quiet this morning. Commuters who usually travel by train were relying on  taxies. DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.