Paulos Wati builds a shack on newly occupied land in Mpukwini, Khayelitsha. Photo: Vincent Lali First Published by GroundUp. People have begun moving on to vacant land owned by the City of Cape Town in an area called Mpukwini in Makhaza, Khayelitsha, since Sunday 21 July. When GroundUp visited the site on Sunday, one person was building a shack, while dozens of others had marked plots with wood and strips of plastic bags. Some dug shallow trenches around their plots to set them apart from others. By the next day, the residents had built about five shacks. Others were still busy building. The stories of Nokuthula Mbala and Paulos Wati show the varied reasons why people take part in illegal land occupations. Mbala lives with her husband and three young children. Until last Thursday she lived in Island informal settlement in Makhaza. But her shack flooded in the winter rains. She had tried to prevent water getting in by placing mounds of sand around the shack, but it was in vain. Returning from the toilet, she found her three-year-old daughter lying in a puddle after she had tried to pick up her younger sister. Mbala had had enough. “It broke my heart to see my kids wallow in the swamp and made me realise that the floods were endangering their health,” she said. She cannot afford to rent elsewhere. “We live on my children’s social grants because my husband doesn’t work,” said Mbala. Wati, who lives with his girlfriend and two children, was building his shack when we spoke to him. He was using materials he received from people living nearby. “I rent a shack that belongs to my landlord, so I can’t dismantle and re-erect it here,” he said. His landlords are an elderly couple who live on their pensions and on his rent money. He gets irregular work as a builder and will go almost anywhere in the Western Cape if offered a job. “I wait for bosses to call me and say they have a piece job for me, otherwise I don’t work,” he said. But he has not had a job for about two months because of the continual winter rains and his landlords want their R550 monthly rent, which he cannot pay. “My landlords demand that I give them their money now so that they can buy food. They don’t care whether I have landed work or not,” he said. So they ordered him to leave. “I worry about my kids and wonder where they will sleep,” he said. “Because we use our kids’ social grant money to pay rent, they have no shoes or food to eat.” Wati said he buys clothes for his children from roadside stands because retailers are too expensive for him. His girlfriend does laundry for township residents to make money. “Sometimes we sleep on empty stomachs because we have no food.” DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.