Mangudya told a parliament committee that individuals would be allowed to withdraw up to $1,000 a day from their foreign currency accounts without restrictions but that companies would need to talk to their banks if they needed cash dollars. Zimbabwe made the RTGS dollar, an interim currency introduced in February, its sole legal tender last Monday, ending a decade of dollarisation and taking another step towards relaunching the Zimbabwean dollar. Finance Minister Mthuli Ncube had earlier told the same committee that individuals will be allowed to withdraw U.S. dollars in cash from their foreign currency accounts. He defended the surprise manner of the announcement and promised that Zimbabwe would not fall into rampant money-printing of the kind that that caused hyperinflation in 2008. To that end, Zimbabwe will initially print 400 million Zimbabwe dollars, to be gradually introduced into circulation to plug the gap left by the end of dollarisation, Mangudya said. The southern African nation, which was hit by a drought that cut crop harvests, is in the grip of foreign currency and fuel shortages and daily electricity cuts lasting up to 15 hours. (Reporting by MacDonald Dzirutwe; Writing by Nqobile Dludla; Editing by Catherine Evans) In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.