Bafana stumbled their way through the group phase, losing to Morocco and Ivory Coast. The three points earned from a narrow victory over neighbours Namibia was enough to see them sneak into the last 16 stage as, literally, the 16th team. Stuart Baxter’s charges then shocked the football world with a vastly improved performance against hosts Egypt. On Wednesday (21:00 SA time), a quarter-final clash awaits against Nigeria, a side Bafana have faced on two previous occasions at AFCON level – and have lost both. Furthermore, they have failed to even score a goal against the Super Eagles, losing 2-0 in semi-finals in 2000 and 4-0 in the group stage in 2004. Leading SA bookies Sportingbet have installed Nigeria as 11/10 favourites, with Bafana on offer at 16/5 . The draw after 90 minutes is available at 2/1 . Sport24 In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.