Drinking water being collected from a communal municipal tap in Masiphumelele informal settlement, Cape Town. (Photo: EPA-EFE/Nic Bothma) In November 2018, the acting Mpumalanga provincial secretary of the ANC, Lindiwe Mabona-Ntshalintshali, promised residents a R14-million water project while campaigning for the party in Moloto village. On Tuesday, several residents told News24 they were struggling to make ends meet as they could no longer afford to buy water. They added they were buying water from residents who had drilled boreholes in their yards, and vendors who sold it from trucks. “It is difficult for me to buy water because I earn little money working as a part-time bricklayer,” said Peter Mbonani, a resident of Phola Park village. “I was very happy when the project was announced. The ANC and the Thembisile Local Municipality must tell us what happened to that project. A resident of Sun City village, Betty Masango, said she had been buying water for consumption and other purposes for the past three years. “Food prices keep going up and I have to spend R5 for a 20l water container,” said Masango who is a domestic worker in Pretoria. “Water comes out of the tap in my yard for just over 30 minutes per day. The water that is supplied by the municipality to the street tanks is not enough.” Nkangala regional ANC spokesperson Sello Matshoga told News24 the R14m project was implemented in November last year. He said construction work was currently underway to install a pipe that would supply water from Loskop Dam near Middelburg to Boekenhouthoek in the Thembisile Hani Local Municipality. “It is painful to us to see people buying water because most of these people are poor,” added Matshoga. “The announcement of the project was not for the election campaign. One of the challenges is that the population of Moloto has grown and this has resulted in a shortage of water. Most of the people who sell water fetch it for free in Vezubuhle village from a pipe that belongs to the local municipality,” he said. Thembisile Hani Local Municipality spokesperson Simphiwe Mashiyane said the municipality was working on finding a solution to the crisis. “We have drilled boreholes in Moloto, and our trucks are supplying water to the tanks in all the affected villages,” added Mashiyane. “It hurts us to see people selling water because some of them sell it at high prices. I’m not sure about their prices but I heard they charge between R350 to R550 per tank, depending on the size of the tank.” DM In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.