Team SA has endured a torrid time in the pool at the Nambu University Municipal Aquatics Centre in Gwangju to date with only Chad le Clos and Tatjana Schoenmaker contesting finals, let alone semi-finals. Schoenmaker finished sixth in the women’s 100m breaststroke on Tuesday, with Le Clos due to contest the men’s 200m butterfly final at 13:47 SA time on Wednesday. Disappointingly for SA fans, Le Clos scratched from the men’s 100m freestyle heats on Wednesday. It was the second event South Africa’s star swimmer had failed to contest after pulling out of the 50m butterfly earlier in the week. With the 200m butterfly in mind, Le Clos is no doubt saving himself for a full crack at the gold medal. Le Clos enters that race with the fifth-fastest time and will have his work cut out for him to topple the favourite, Hungarian teenager Kristof Milak. At the time of writing, Le Clos, who is rumoured to be struggling with a groin injury, is still scheduled to compete in the 100m butterfly heats on Friday. Meanwhile, the Team SA members that did partake on Wednesday continued the disappointing trend. Swimming in the heats of the men’s 200 IM, Eben Vorster recorded the 30th-fastest time (2:05.69), a full 7.90 seconds behind the overall leader, Laszlo Cech of Hungary (1:57.79). In the women’s 200m butterfly, Dune Coetzee posted the 20th-quickest time (2:11.92), but still trailed American Hali Flickinger (2:05.96) by 5.96 seconds. DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.