In a Bitou Municipality notice, motorists were warned that the highway was closed between the Shell Ultra City and Kwanokuthulu due to the ongoing community protests that started in Qolweni on Tuesday night. A group had begun throwing stones and burning tyres to block the road. Last month, residents had marched from Qolweni to the municipal buildings over service delivery. Organisers of the march said they were disgruntled by high unemployment rates, the slow pace of housing projects, people who rented their houses and stayed in shacks, tenders awarded to the same businesses and a lack of progress in sport development in their community. The municipality said on Wednesday that various authorities were on the scene. These included the public order police, crowd management officials and provincial traffic. “Traffic in both directions [is] still being diverted via the airport/Robberg Road from the Knysna direction and through Plettenberg Bay town, from the Port Elizabeth direction,” the municipality said in a statement. DM In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.