The controversial show has been renewed for a third season but is now removing the suicide scene of the protagonist at the end of the first season which depicts Hannah (Katherine Langford) slitting her wrists in a bathtub, after medical experts told Netflix it’s harmful. The entire lengthy suicide scene is axed, leaving only the part thereafter where her parents find her body. American research by the Nationwide Children’s Hospital in America showed that suicides among 10 to 17-year-old boys in the United States spiked by 30% in April 2017 the month after 13 Reasons was first released on Netflix. On social media on Tuesday Netflix said that it had decided to delete the suicide scene. “We’ve heard from many young people that 13 Reasons Why encouraged them to start conversations about difficult issues like depression and suicide and get help – often for the first time. As we prepare to launch season 3 later this summer, we’ve been mindful about the ongoing debate around the show,” Netflix said in their statement. “So on the advice of medical experts, including Dr Christine Moutier, chief medical officer at the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, we’ve decided with creator Brian Yorkey and the producers to edit the scene in which Hannah takes her own life from Season 1.”The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, as well as the American Association of Suicidology, welcome Netflix’s alteration of the episode. In a statement creator, Brian Yorkey said: “It was our hope, in making 13 Reasons Why into a television show, to tell a story that would help young viewers feel seen and heard and encourage empathy in all who viewed it, much as the bestselling book did before us”. “Our creative intent in portraying the ugly, painful reality of suicide in such graphic detail in season 1 was, to tell the truth about the horror of such an act, and make sure no one would ever wish to emulate it.”  1 “But as we ready to launch season 3, we have heard concerns about the scene and have agreed with Netflix to re-edit it.” DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.