Buthelezi EMS’s ambulances on a smallholding in Eikenhof in the south of Johannesburg waiting to be branded. The SIU will investigate contracts between the Free State and North West Departments of Health and the controversial private ambulance company Buthelezi EMS. This is according to proclamation 42 of 2019 published in the Government Gazette. The investigation will relate to contracts for both aero-medical services and ground ambulance services, contracts worth millions. The two ground ambulance contracts in question are with Buthelezi EMS, while the aero-medical contract is with Buthelezi HEMS (a joint venture between Buthelezi EMS and HALO Aviation). Last year then Minister of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi told Spotlight that in terms of medical need there is no debate at all and that Buthelezi EMS are not adding value and that they are in fact causing more problems. He also said that it is not national policy to use private service providers for emergency medical services. This followed on Spotlight’s Health4Sale investigative series that, amongst others, exposed the misuse of HIV funds to pay Buthelezi EMS in the North West, evidence of extreme overcharging in both the North West and Free State, various tender irregularities in both provinces, a suspect price increase in the Free State, and allegedly poor quality of service in the ground ambulance operations in both provinces. Spotlight understands that since the information has become public the North West Department of Health has virtually ceased to use Buthelezi EMS for inter-facility transfers and has been attempting to recoup some of the money that was paid due to overcharging. However, in the Free State Buthelezi EMS and companies linked to the Director Thapelo Buthelezi have continued to provide ground ambulance services in various health districts. HALO Aviation, which was the other partner in the Buthelezi HEMS entity, has been awarded the province’s new aero-medical contract but Buthelezi EMS is no longer a partner. However, Buthelezi EMS has found new partners in several provinces where bids have been submitted for lucrative aero-medical contracts. There is also a good chance that the SIU investigation will expand to Mpumalanga and Limpopo where a provision in the Public Finance Management Act was controversially used to “piggy-back” on the Free State’s aero-medical contract with Buthelezi HEMS. The SIU will, among others, investigate whether there was “maladministration in connection with the affairs of the FSDOH and the NWDOH”, “improper or unlawful conduct by employees or officials of the FSDOH and the NWDOH” and “unlawful appropriation or expenditure of public money or property”. They will also focus on “any related unauthorised, irregular or fruitless and wasteful expenditure incurred by the FSDOH, the NWDOH or the state.” It will also investigate “any unlawful or improper conduct by employees or officials of the FSDOH and the NWDOH, respectively, or applicable service providers, or any other person or entity” in relations to the allegations. DM In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.