The alleged coup bid came at a crucial time, just before the council was set to sign a power-sharing deal with Sudan’s main opposition group, Lt. Gen. Gamal Omar said in a statement on state-run Sudan TV. Those detained include 13 senior members of the army and national security services, he said. Omar didn’t present any evidence, although witnesses described a heightened security presence in the capital, Khartoum, with troops positioned at key bridges, intersections and the main radio station. Sudan, Africa’s third-largest country, has been roiled by sporadic coups, insurgencies and mass protests since independence in 1956. The military council has been in charge after nationwide demonstrations sparked by an economic crisis spurred it in April to oust President Omar al-Bashir — an army officer who had himself seized power in 1989. The country’s firebrand opposition movement has kept up its protests, despite a security crackdown that’s claimed more than 100 lives, accusing the council of trying to block a genuine transition to democracy. Under the yet-to-be-signed deal agreed last week, military and civilian representatives would share power on a sovereign council for just over three years before elections. In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.