Both the Western Cape High Court and the Constitutional Court have delivered judgments that hold PRASA liable for injuries to passengers that occurred because the doors were open while trains were moving. Archive photo: Brent Meersman First published by GroundUp The National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) has granted the United National Transport Union UNTU’s umbrella union Fedusa a Section 77 certificate to proceed with a strike on Friday 26 July. In a statement at the end of May, UNTU said Nedlac had to grant the union permission to strike because negotiations for improved safety of railway employees had “reached the end of the road”. Fedusa and UNTU’s concerns are: Fedusa has also called for the SANDF to be deployed to “safeguard platforms for commuters”. Matthew Hirsch of commuter activist group #UniteBehind said the organisation is sympathetic to UNTU’s call for safe trains. But he said #UniteBehind does not support the call for the SANDF to be deployed on Metrorail. He said #UniteBehind members understand why people are desperate enough to call for the army but “we don’t believe this is a long term solution and it could have serious implications”. Neither the South African Transport and Allied Workers Union, which is affiliated to Cosatu, or the National Transport Movement, affiliated to Saftu, are supporting the strike. A Cape Town train driver, who did not want to be named, said she was concerned because UNTU is not the majority union and so the strike may not be effective. She said that the number of people who participate in strikes has dropped because workers have lost faith in unions. “Unions have deviated from their mandates, they don’t take our grievances seriously,” she said. Prasa spokesperson Nana Zenani said the organisation will ensure that contingency plans are in place so that the strike does not affect operations. What this means in the context of a service where trains are typically already delayed by an hour during rush hour is unclear. DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.