Archive Photo: Mine Community members march on Dithabeng - Photo: Mphahlele View/Facebook The ongoing struggle over a Limpopo mine, reported on by amaBhungane on Thursday 18 July, has claimed its first victim – an 18-year-old school pupil who police have named as Boshelo Petja. On the evening of Wednesday 17 July, violent protests erupted near the Dithabeng mine, where a clash allegedly ensued between Ga-Mphahlele community members and mine security.  1 Dithabeng Mining, which is owned by tobacco baron Adriano Mazzotti and his associates, has been accused by some in the community of operating unlawfully, in cahoots with the local chief, his mother and a faction of the traditional leadership.  1 A clash over the mine has intersected with a historical leadership dispute around the chieftaincy, resulting in violent protests. According to a media statement issued by the provincial police commissioner’s office on Thursday, initial investigations “revealed that the deceased was shot during a protest action near this [Dithabeng] mine.  1 “Allegedly, during the protest, a conflict erupted between the security guards and community members until shots were fired and one person sustained serious injuries.” Police said they “responded to a call from the hospital on this day about an 18-year-old boy, who was admitted with gunshot wounds and later succumbed to his injuries”.   1 Police are investigating a case of murder but say that no arrests have yet been made. DM * READ Malema buddy’s mine leaves community reeling  In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.