By Roberta Rampton There were no details provided to reporters on when such talks would occur. U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has appeared hopeful of a diplomatic way forward despite North Korea test-firing two new short-range ballistic missiles on July 25. Pompeo and North Korean Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho had been expected to meet on the sidelines of a Southeast Asia security forum in Bangkok this week, but Ri canceled his trip to the conference, a diplomatic source said. On Tuesday, the senior U.S. official also said it appeared Ri would not be in Bangkok. The most recent contact between North Korea and the United States occurred last week, when a U.S. official, in Asia for unrelated talks, traveled to the demilitarized zone between the two Koreas to deliver photographs commemorating the June 30 meeting there between U.S. President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, the senior U.S. administration official told reporters. Pompeo said on Monday he hoped working-level talks to revive denuclearization talks with North Korea could occur “very soon,” but emphasized that a follow-up leaders’ summit was not planned. Pompeo left Washington on Tuesday for Thailand and will also visit Australia and Micronesia in a trip lasting until Aug. 6. A February summit in Vietnam between Trump and Kim collapsed after the two sides failed to reconcile differences between Washington’s demands for Pyongyang’s complete denuclearization and North Korean demands for sanctions relief. At their DMZ meeting they agreed to resume working-level talks, but Pyongyang has since accused Washington of breaking a promise by planning to hold joint military exercises with South Korea in August and warned that these could derail the dialogue. Trump told reporters at the White House on Tuesday: “We’ll see what happens. I can’t tell you what’s going to happen.” North Korea has also warned of a possible end to its freeze on nuclear and long-range missile tests in place since 2017, which Trump has repeatedly upheld as evidence of the success of his engagement with Kim. (Reporting by Roberta Rampton and David Brunnstrom; editing by Susan Thomas and Grant McCool) In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.