The unemployment rate increased to 29% from 27.6% in the three months through March, Statistics South Africa said in a report released Tuesday in the capital Pretoria. The median estimate of three economists in a Bloomberg survey was 27.7%. Key Insights
The working-age population increased by 150,000 in the quarter and the number of discouraged workseekers decreased, which means more people were counted as officially unemployed.
The statistics office says the jobless rate is the highest since 2008, when the current data series started.
The jobless rate in Africa’s most-industrialized economy has remained above 20% for at least two decades, largely due to insufficient economic growth. Gross domestic product, which hasn’t expanded by more than 2% a year since 2013, must grow by more than 5% annually to boost job creation, according to the government’s National Development Plan, an economic blueprint first presented in 2012.
A 25% increase in business liquidations in the second quarter compared with the same period a year earlier may have added to the jobless rate.
At 42,000 transport cut the most jobs followed by mining, which lose 36,000 posts. In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.