He made the announcement towards the end of his budget speech, and elaborated further at a press briefing shortly thereafter.  1 He said after last weekend, where 13 people were killed in 24 hours in Phillipi, he spoke with Minister of Defence Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula. They concluded: “This can’t continue.” They then approached President Cyril Ramaphosa for “extra deployment” in the form of the SANDF. Ramaphosa assented. Cele said they decided on this move, not because the DA has been agitating for it, but because the communities called for it through the Community Policing Forums. On 02:00 Friday morning National Police Commissioner Kehla Sitole will give a “big contingent” of police and metro police officers their marching order to “seal” areas where gang violence is rife.  2 Within twelve hours, they will be joined by the SANDF. Cele said they’ll be going after some of their regular “clients” – including people who are out on bail.  1 “We want the real stuff, not the pushers of the drugs,” he said. They will also go after illegal firearms. “They’re here for us to police, to make sure not so many people die,” Cele said of the SANDF’s involvement. The deployment is for three months and can be renewed.  3 “After that, there needs to be sustainability,” he said.  1 Sitole described the operation as a “high density, integrated, multidisciplinary, coordinated” operation.  5 He said the SANDF will be “led and commanded” by the police. He said they have the capacity to support the police.  5 “This time we call it Blue and Brown,” Sitole said. He said the Defence Force also helped with policing during the elections. “They did an excellent job.”  2 He said the operation will have a “stabilisation approach” to “stamp the authority of the state” on the area.  2 “There are certain areas that requires a quick response.” News24 In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.