By Mahmoud Mourad Egypt’s 1-0 loss to South Africa on Saturday led to an immediate purge of Egyptian football officials, taking the gloss off a high-prestige event which Egypt volunteered to host at short notice after Cameroon was stripped of the competition. “This timing needs discipline that will be found only in the army,” Farouk Gaafar, who led the Pharaohs in 1996-1997, told a talk show on Sunday evening. Asked by the presenter whether a military official should preside over the football federation, Gafaar said; “Of course”, adding that the country’s soccer administration needed “an iron fist” to be restructured. “I haven’t seen discipline like in the armed forces,” said Gaafar, who once coached an Egyptian club run by the military. Analysts say Egypt’s military has been consolidating its expansive role in the country since President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi came to power in 2014. The then-military chief led the 2013 overthrow of Egypt’s first freely elected president, Mohamed Mursi of the Muslim Brotherhood, after mass protests against his rule. In May, after a train crash at Cairo’s main station left more than 20 dead, Sisi appointed military General Kamel al-Wazir as transport minister. A comic (meme) circulated on social media showing Sisi greeting al-Wazir and asking him “Do you know about football coaching?”. EFA President Hany Abo Rida resigned hours after the South Africa defeat, simultaneously sacking the team’s Mexican coach Javier Aguirre and his assistants. He also called on EFA’s board members to resign and most have done so. Local media reported that authorities are investigating administrative and financial violations committed by the national football federation. (Reporting and writing by Mahmoud Mourad; Editing by Yousef Saba and Ed Osmond) In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.