Controversial Nigerian pastor Timothy Omotoso during his rape and human trafficking trial at the Port Elizabeth High Court on October 17, 2018 in Nelson Mandela Bay, South Africa. (Photo by Gallo Images / Netwerk24 / Lulama Zenzile) The Commission on Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Rights has noted an increase in dubious religious practises such as the commercialisation of religion and the abuse of other people’s belief systems. Newly appointed chairperson, Professor Luka David Mosoma, said at a press briefing on 25 July, 2019 that recent behaviour included emotional, physical, spiritual, financial, and psychological abuse of communities across religious, cultural and language spectrums. Highly publicised cases include: The incidents have brought into question how religion should be regulated. Mosoma says the incidents have nothing to do with religion, but rather with those practising it. “It has never been about regulating religion,” Mosoma said. “Religion can be practised by anyone. So it is people’s behaviour that needs to be regulated… The abuses referred to have raised critical issues around freedom of religion and human dignity.” Mosoma said the commission will continue to support Cheryl Zondi, but inadequate funds prevent it from helping her financially. However, the commission plans to strengthen its relationship with the Commission on Gender Equality and the SA Human Rights Commission. “As a commission, we will work with the relevant state organs to mitigate against ill practices. We will walk through it case by case. I, however, invite religious communities to help us,” Mosoma said. The new commissioners have reaffirmed their commitment to developing a number of strategic programmes, interventions and the general operations of the commission. Part of their strategy is studying religious, cultural and linguistic cases over the past five years, how the previous commissioners approached these cases and adding their approach to the resolution of cases. They further affirmed that they would continue to uphold the constitutional task that the commission has by playing a role in helping to build a “united South Africa bound by a common loyalty to our country and all its people”. DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.