Former DA councillor Doctor Radebe was attacked by a group of people he referred to as “[former agriculture MEC] Mosebenzi Zwane’s personal force” after he reported that cattle carcasses had been dumped at a stream in Vrede. “I alerted the Department of Environmental Affairs after I reported the dairy carcasses. It caught the attention of Parliament itself. People around Vrede became so violent. They were angry at me because I reported the matter in the press. “I was attacked personally by people I believe were Zwane’s personal force,” Radebe told the commission, chaired by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo. The commission is focusing on the dairy farm project which promised 100 black emerging farmers five cows each as part of an empowerment scheme. Gifted to Estina in 2013 under a free 99-year lease by the Department of Agriculture in the province, the farm has been one of the most controversial transactions between the Guptas and a government entity, News24 earlier reported. Radebe recalled that during the attack, one person in the group yelled that he “was disturbing the ANC from doing its work”. The former DA councillor approached the Vrede police station to lay a charge. Police officers allegedly told him they would need to consult their station commander first, who was identified as a Mr Xhasa. “He [Xhasa] said such cases does not fall in their office and informed me that a certain official from Bethlehem would deal with it as this was a political case – even today , these people from Bethlehem never came back to me,” he told the commission. Zondo highlighted that it was another instance the commission heard about involving claims that the Vrede police station turned citizens away when they wanted to open cases involving allegations of a political nature. As a result, he instructed the commission’s legal team to follow up the matter and report back to him. Radebe further told the commission one “member” of Zwane’s personal force, who he identified as a Bongani Radebe, later apologised to him for the attack and said he was not “thinking” when he engaged in the activity. “He said that he was duped/not thinking clearly and that he realised I was just fighting for the people of Vrede. He told me my stance is correct. Till this day he still says this,” Radebe said. The inquiry continues. News24 In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.