Redi Tlhabi, master of ceremonies for the event, along with thought leaders, corporates, start-ups and innovators from across South Africa will lead the summit by addressing the safety challenges South African’s face in their homes and on the streets. Topics to be addressed will bring the most pressing issues facing the country to the fore, including safety for women, personal safety and commuter safety. This summit, with its innovative speakers and panelists, will contribute to the much-needed safety conversation while equipping guests with the thinking and knowledge needed to use current and new technology to help create a safer future for all South Africans. “Safety for all users is a key priority for Uber, and we’re constantly exploring and building new products to enhance the safety of riders and drivers using the Uber app. Through the Summit, we are looking to ignite conversations and debate with like-minded individuals in order to identify future actions that can be developed into solutions to advance personal safety in South African cities,” explains Nduduzo Nyanda, Country Manager for Uber. The Summit aims to create a collaborative discussion, whereby solutions can be conceptualised and developed across the country. Networking opportunities will allow participants to connect with like-minded leaders in the industry. A student component has also been brought into this event, as Uber will be hosting a Hackathon in Johannesburg on August 3 and 4 2019, which aims to engage students in Gauteng in developing digital solutions to safety issues which affect communities across South Africa. Winners of the Hackathon will present their technology solution to enhance personal safety at the Tech for Safety Summit. Some of the speakers who will take the stage at this year’s summit include: Ms. Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, Minister of Communications and Digital Technology
Sachin Kansal, Senior Director of Product Management at Uber
Tumi Sole, Founder of Country Duty More speakers will be announced in due course. The Tech for Safety Summit will offer the highest quality conference experience with combined networking opportunities, for all students, corporates, technology leaders, start-ups and many more. *Due to the limited availability of seats, early registration is strongly recommended to ensure access to the event. Send your full name, designation, company, email address and contact number to rsvp@ubertechsafety.co.za DM In other news... South Africa is in a very real battle. A political fight where terms such as truth and democracy can seem more of a suggestion as opposed to a necessity. On one side of the battle are those openly willing to undermine the sovereignty of a democratic society, completely disregarding the weight and power of the oaths declared when they took office. If their mission was to decrease society’s trust in government - mission accomplished. And on the other side are those who believe in the ethos of a country whose constitution was once declared the most progressive in the world. The hope that truth, justice and accountability in politics, business and society is not simply fairy tale dust sprinkled in great electoral speeches; but rather a cause that needs to be intentionally acted upon every day. However, it would be an offensive oversight not to acknowledge that right there on the front lines, alongside whistleblowers and civil society, stand the journalists. Armed with only their determination to inform society and defend the truth, caught in the crossfire of shots fired from both sides. If you believe in supporting the cause and the work of Daily Maverick then take your position on the battleground and sign up to Maverick Insider today. For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.