An ANC takeover of the Cederberg municipal council from a DA-led coalition has been ruled unlawful by the Western Cape High Court. (Photo: EPA / Nic Bothma / Google Maps) Nearly one month after a council sitting in the Cederberg municipality which saw the DA-led council removed in a motion of no confidence, the Western Cape High Court ruled that the election of the municipality’s new mayor, deputy mayor and speaker were “unlawful, reviewed and set aside”. ** Read in Daily Maverick: Game of Thrones, Cederberg style: ANC seizes local council as DA defects. ** On 26 June, the DA speaker of the Cederberg Municipality, Bertie Zass, allowed a motion of no confidence in the mayor, William Farmer, and the deputy mayor, Fransiena Sokuyeko. Zass resigned as council speaker and defected to the ANC, then voted with his new party to remove Farmer and Sokuyeko, a member of the Alliance of Democratic Congress (ADC). Before the council sitting, the 11-seat Cederberg Municipality council consisted of five seats each for the ANC and DA, with the ADC taking the 11th seat. The DA led the municipality alongside the ADC, with Sokuyeka as deputy mayor. Following Zass’s defection, the ANC took over the municipality, with Sylvia Quntu becoming mayor. Mariaan Nel became deputy mayor and Paul Strauss took Zass’s vacant speaker position. The DA then took the matter for court review. Monday’s court ruling stated the decisions of the council meeting of 26 June were unlawful – including the removal of Farmer and Sokuyeko as well as the appointments of Quntu, Nel and Strauss. The decision to make Strauss the council’s speaker, as well as any decisions made by Strauss as speaker were also declared unlawful. DA Western Cape leader Bonginkosi Madikizela said, “We are further encouraged that these members of the ANC along with Bertie Zass, who recently left the DA to join the ANC and who also initiated and presided over these unlawful proceedings, would be held financially responsible for the legal costs… this is a victory, not only for the DA, but for the people of Cederberg who, through their vote, elected the DA to govern the municipality. “If the ANC wants to govern they must be elected democratically by the people of Cederberg.” The ANC in the Western Cape told Daily Maverick “We will study the judgment before commenting further.” DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.