Western Cape Premier Helen Zille in Cape Town, 10 October 2018. Photo: Leila Dougan “I hope to continue the battle of ideas outside of direct party politics and as such, I will be writing and speaking about liberal ideas and solutions to South Africa’s problems,” she said in a video clip.  6 She added in a statement that the IRR provided a platform to defeat “racial nationalist and neo-Marxist ideas” by doing three things: uniting the middle, protecting property rights and promoting individual freedoms.  5 Zille, who led the DA between 2007 and 2015, detailed where she would be focusing her influence. She planned to help build support to stop expropriation of land without compensation; protect savings and pensions; halt efforts to “destroy the South African healthcare sector through NHI [National Health Insurance] and adopt empowerment policies based on actual disadvantage rather than race”.  2 Zille began her career as a journalist for the Rand Daily Mail, where she helped uncover the circumstances leading to the death of Black Consciousness leader Steve Biko in 1977. DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.