“It is with immense sadness that we confirm that Jonathan (Johnny) Clegg […] succumbed to pancreatic cancer at the age of 66 on the afternoon of 16 July 2019 at his family home in Johannesburg, South Africa,” read a statement from Clegg’s manager Roddy Quin on Tuesday night. Tributes immediately began to pour in for Clegg both locally and internationally. Clegg had a devoted fan following in France, where Le Zoulou Blanc (the white Zulu) performed to sold-out stadiums. But in South Africa there is already a particularly acute sense of grief at the passing of a man described by many as providing the soundtrack of national life. “A towering giant has fallen with the passing of legendary singer-songwriter and anthropologist Johnny Clegg,” tweeted Minister of Arts and Culture Nathi Mthethwa. “Our hearts are sore and as he famously sang in Asimbonanga, ‘oh the sea is cold and the sky is grey’ as we contend with the loss of a torchbearer of our struggle for freedom.” <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> South African politicians of all stripes joined the chorus of grief. GOOD party leader Patricia de Lille described Clegg as a “cultural legend who transcended race to shine a bright ray of light and hope from apartheid South Africa”. Clegg “wrote our South African story when our country was at its worst and its best”, tweeted the DA’s Mmusi Maimane. International media outlets also carried Clegg’s death as breaking news. America’s National Public Radio (NPR) called Clegg “one of South Africa’s most creative and outspoken cultural figures”. Clegg leaves behind his wife of 31 years, Jenny, and sons Jesse and Jaron. “His passing has left us numb and we request that the family’s privacy be respected during this trying time,” Clegg’s manager wrote. Although calls are already mounting for Clegg to be honoured with a state funeral, Quin indicated that the musician’s family will be holding a private service. “There will be a service for (the) public to pay their respects and the details hereof will be announced in due course,” Quin said. DM For more of Daily Maverick’s writing on Johnny Clegg read here, here, here and here In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.