“During one of our routine maintenance operations, we triggered an issue that is making it difficult for some people to upload or send photos and videos,” a Facebook representative said in a statement. “We’re working to get things back to normal as quickly as possible and we apologize for any inconvenience.”  1 Instagram
@instagram
We’re aware that some people are having trouble uploading or sending images and videos on Instagram. We’re sorry for the trouble and are working to get things back to normal as quickly as possible. #instagramdown
Sent via Twitter for iPhone. View original tweet. Tracking website Downdetector.com showed Instagram has been having issues since 8:45 a.m. in New York, while Facebook has been having issues since 8:04 a.m. The WhatsApp messaging service has been having issues since 9:58 a.m., Downdetector showed. Social media rival Twitter Inc. also was reporting user issues with delivery of direct messages and notifications. “We’re working on a fix and will follow up as soon as we have an update for you. Apologies for the inconvenience,” the company said in a tweet posted from its support account at 11:57 a.m. New York time. We’re currently having some issues with DM delivery and notifications. We’re working on a fix and will follow up as soon as we have an update for you. Apologies for the inconvenience. In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.