President Trump slammedChina on the day his trade team arrived in Shanghai. He tweeted: “China is doing very badly, the worst year in 27—was supposed to start buying our agricultural product now—no signs that they are doing so.” He added: “That is the problem with China, they just don’t come through.” His tweets came just as the two nations resumed negotiations following a three-month breakup. He later said Beijing is willing to make concessions, but he’s not sure if he will accept them and that the decision on reaching a deal is up to him, not China.  Here’s how we got to this point. The White House is monitoring a buildup of Chinese forces on Hong Kong’s border, a senior administration official said. Earlier, Beijing said recent violence in the city’s protests was the “creation of the U.S.,”  laying direct blame on Washington—which American officials denied. China has been trying to shift responsibility for the unrest to unspecified foreign forces. Hong Kong GDP The unrest and ongoing trade spat haven’t been good for Hong Kong. Economic momentum has weakened in recent months on “uncertainties,” leader Carrie Lam said. There’s “no room for optimism for the second quarter and the entire year,” the city’s chief executive told business groups. The consensus is for GDP growth in the June quarter to pick up to 1.5% year-on-year while slowing to 0.9% from the prior period. The iPhone didn’t do so well, but Apple investors are looking ahead. The company predicted current-quarter sales near the high end of estimates—$61 billion to $64 billion—a sign of optimism in new handsets coming later this year. The all-important iPhone missed on both unit sales and revenue last quarter, but wearables and services are picking up the slack. Shares gained in post-market trading. Boris Johnson said it’s “up to the EU” to compromise on a Brexit agreement and avoid a no-deal divorce. “If they can’t compromise, if they really can’t do it, then clearly we have to get ready for a no-deal exit,” he said, reiterating that Britain won’t accept an Irish backstop.  The U.K. prime minister is expected next week to commit hundreds of millions of pounds on hospitals and health care technology, as he seeks to deliver on his own most contentious political promise, a person familiar said. This is what’s caught our eye over the last 24 hours. In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.