The SAWS advised that the rain was expected to hit the area at roughly 21:00 on Monday but that most of the effects of the cold front would be felt on Tuesday and Wednesday.  1 “The cold front is expected to hit tonight (Monday), affecting mainly the western parts of the Western Cape, moving into the interior by tomorrow (Tuesday) morning,” SAWS forecaster Kate Turner said. “The storm will bring prefrontal troughs from about 20:00-21:00, where people can expect some light rain, but it will hit from midnight onward,” Turner added.  1 The SAWS said the effects of the cold front were expected to move quickly and should last for the entire day on Tuesday, with a few showers expected on Wednesday – mainly for Cape Town, the mountainous areas, and the south coast garden route. “The main regions affected on Tuesday will be the Cape Metropole, the Cape Winelands, and the Overberg,” said Turner. Vulnerable areas at risk Disaster Risk Management spokesperson in the City of Cape Town, Charlotte Powell, also told News24 that other vulnerable areas were at risk. “The Cape Metropole, of course, is at risk of flooding, as well as informal settlements, backyard dwellers, and low-lying areas. “These areas hold the most vulnerable populations [to the storm],” Powell said. The City of Cape Town advised residents to check their drainage systems, especially their roofs, because gale force winds were expected. The City added that the storm should subside by Wednesday morning. News24 In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.