The famed satirical magazine featuring the freckled face of Alfred E. Neuman will stop publishing new material outside of its end-of-year specials, owner DC said in an email. In a few weeks, the bi-monthly publications will only feature vintage MAD content and be sold at comic stores. The magazines will still be mailed to subscribers, and DC will continue to publish MAD books and special collections. “Working at MAD was a childhood dream come true. MAD is an institution with such a rich history,” former editor Allie Goertz wrote on Twitter. “It informed just about every comedian and writer I (and probably you) look up to.” It was one of the last satirical rags left in print. Spy, a monthly founded and edited by Graydon Carter and Kurt Anderson, closed in 1998. The Onion stopped printing in 2013, though it continues to entertain online and on social media. “I am profoundly sad to hear that after 67 years, MAD Magazine is ceasing publication. I can’t begin to describe the impact it had on me as a young kid – it’s pretty much the reason I turned out weird.,” tweeted comedian ‘Weird Al’ Yankovic, who served as MAD’s first guest editor in 2015. “Goodbye to one of the all-time greatest American institutions.” I am profoundly sad to hear that after 67 years, MAD Magazine is ceasing publication. I can’t begin to describe the impact it had on me as a young kid – it’s pretty much the reason I turned out weird. Goodbye to one of the all-time greatest American institutions. #ThanksMAD pic.twitter.com/01Ya4htdSR — Al Yankovic (@alyankovic) July 4, 2019
President Donald Trump unfavorably compared Democratic presidential candidate Pete Buttigieg to geeky, gap-toothed Neuman in a May interview with Politico. In perhaps a sign of the magazine’s fading relevance, the 37-year old mayor said he had no idea what Trump was talking about. “I’ll be honest, I had to Google that,” he said. “I guess it’s just a generational thing. I didn’t get the reference.” MAD Magazine tweeted in response: “Who’s Pete Buttigieg? Must be a generational thing.” In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.