Megan Rapinoe, U.S. captain and goalscorer in the final: “It’s unbelievable. Just to know all of the people in our group that put in so much work, obviously the players. We have all our friends and family here. It’s like history I don’t know how to feel right now. It is ridiculous. “We’re crazy that’s what makes us special. We just have no quit in us. We are so tight. We will do anything to win.” U.S. President Donald Trump, who had criticised Rapinoe for spurning a potential White House visit, tweeted: “Congratulations to the U.S. Women’s Soccer Team on winning the World Cup! Great and exciting play. America is proud of you all!” Jill Ellis, U.S. coach: “This is an amazing group of players but even better group of people. Just fantastic resiliency, just chemistry. They put their heart and soul into this journey and I cannot thank them enough. It’s been fantastic. “I just said to them they were unbelievable. Congratulations. They made history. Enjoy it. This is unbelievable.” Alex Morgan, U.S. striker “This team is something special, and to do it back-to-back is pretty incredible. We had a hard route to the final. I’m just proud of this team. We felt confident. We felt like it was going to take us a bit to gain momentum throughout the tournament. Jill (Ellis) did a great job in terms of managing the team, so credit to her and the team for playing our roles to a ‘T’.” Billie Jean King: tennis great and women’s equality campaigner tweeted: “Congratulations to the #USWNT on their 4th World Cup win! These athletes have brought more attention, support and pride to women’s sport than perhaps any other team in history. It is long past time to pay them what they rightly deserve.” Serena Williams, a 23-times Grand Slam singles title holder, retweeted King, adding her own commentary: “Congrats team USA! Billie says it best here! So happy for each one of you and so proud. ❤️ @USWNT” Alex Scott, BBC analyst and former England international: “The USA do not apologise for wanting to be the best and they have that winning mentality that everyone else needs to get. They show up on the biggest occasions.”  1 Former U.S. President Barack Obama tweeted: “Yes! Fourth star. Back to back. Congrats to the record breakers on the @USWNT, an incredible team that’s always pushing themselves—and the rest of us—to be even better. Love this team. #OneNationOneTeam” Former U.S. President Bill Clinton tweeted: “A big congrats to the World Champions! So very proud of the @USWNT!” Former U.S. Vice President and current presidential candidate Joe Biden tweeted: “Congratulations to the @USWNT on back-to-back Women’s World Cup titles! You never fail to make our country proud — on and off the field. #OneNationOneTeam” Zach Ertz, husband to midfielder Julie Ertz and an NFL Super Bowl champion with the Philadelphia Eagles, tweeted: “WORLD FREAKING CHAMPS!!!!! SO PROUD OF YOU @julieertz!!!” Fifteen-times golf major winner Tiger Woods tweeted: “Congratulations to the @USWNT on winning the Women’s World Cup. The Woods family didn’t miss a minute. A championship effort today and amazing play all Tournament. So happy for all of you.” (Reporting by Simon Evans and Amy Tennery; Editing by Ken Ferris)  1 In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.