Sudanese people march on 13 July 2019 to mark the 40th day since scores of protesters were killed during a sit-in outside army headquarters in Khartoum, Sudan. (Photo: EPA-EFE / Marwan Ali) The signing of the document in Khartoum on Wednesday (10th of July)  between the Transitional Military Council (TMC) and the Forces of Freedom and Change (FFC) alliance came after a series of delays due to disagreements over the details of the agreement. The two sides are still working on a constitutional declaration, which is expected to be signed on Friday. “The agreement specifies that there will be five members from each side in the sovereign council, which will effectively be the presidency of the country,”  Al Jazeera’s Hiba Morgan said from Addis Ababa in neighbouring Ethiopia. “There will be members nominated by the FFC to the executive council which will be considered the ministers,” she added. “The document doesn’t mention what roles the sovereign and executive councils will have – that will be defined in the constitutional declaration, which is going to be the core of the transitional agreement and state exactly what role the sovereign council will play.” ‘Huge achievement’ The TMC and the opposition coalition have been wrangling for weeks over what form Sudan’s transitional government should take after the military deposed President Omar al-Bashir on April 11 after months of mass protests against his 30-year rule. Protesters had remained in the streets following al-Bashir’s toppling, fearing the generals intended to cling to power or preserve some form of authoritarian rule. Long-stalled talks between the TMC and the opposition alliance collapsed after the deadly dispersal of a protest camp in Khartoum on June 3. Direct talks were later revived after mediation efforts by the African Union and Ethiopia. DM In other news... July 18 marks Nelson Mandela day. All over the country, South African citizens devote 67 minutes to charitable causes in memory of Madiba. It's a great initiative and one of those few occasions in South Africa where we come together as a nation in pursuit of a common cause. An annual 67 minutes isn't going to cut it though. In the words of Madiba:
"A critical, independent and investigative free press is the lifeblood of any democracy." Every day Daily Maverick investigates and exposes the deep rot of state capture and corruption but we need your help. Without our readers' support we simply won't survive. We created Maverick Insider as a membership platform where our readers can become part of our community while ensuring that we can keep doing the investigations that we do and, crucially, that our articles remain free to everyone that reads them. Sign up to Maverick Insider this Mandela Month and make that meaningful contribution last longer than 67 minutes.For whatever amount you choose, you can support Daily Maverick and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.