Zuma was speaking to SABC News in the Randburg Magistrates Court on Friday morning, just moments after his son Duduzane was acquitted of culpable homicide. Duduzane Zuma was accused of causing the death of Phumzile Dube in February 2014, when the car he was driving was involved in a collision with a taxi on the M1 highway in Sandton. Zuma also told the public broadcaster that he was pleased with the not guilty judgment and that the trial had found that Duduzane wasn’t negligent. Last month, the commission confirmed the former president would be appearing in the third week of July. His lawyer, Dan Mantsha, earlier told News24 that Zuma was “relishing the moment”. “There has never been any correspondence from us that he does not want to attend. He has always raised his concerns about the [impartiality] and fairness displayed by the commission, according to his views. It is his view that the commission, from the word go, has treated him as an accused person,” Mantsha said.  1 Speaking in Zulu on Friday, Zuma said: ” Eqinisweni ngicelwe iCommission ukuthi ke ngizobeka engase ngikubeke, sekuzozwakala khona ukuthi kuhamba kanjani … ngiyaya khona . (Truthfully, I was called by the commission to come ‘say my piece’, so we will meet there and we will see how it goes… I’m going.)” It still remains unclear whether Zuma will testify, block the commission’s attempts to have him give testimony, or use the opportunity to reiterate his claims that he is being targeted as part of political battles. In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.