ARCHIVE PHOTO: Construction of social housing taking place in Delft, just outside Cape Town, 26 September 2018. Photo: Leila Dougan The workers had been installing a sewer line in Sandown Road at around 16:30 on Tuesday when a “sidewall of the trench collapsed unexpectedly”, the company said in a statement. “A full, independent investigation into the incident is underway and a comprehensive report will be submitted to the Department of Labour within the next two weeks.” The company said it would not be releasing the names of the deceased. “At this stage, the families are being contacted for assistance and the names of the deceased will not be made public. Our deepest condolences go out to their families and loved ones.” According to the company’s website, it was awarded a R48-million contract to do the dualing of a portion of Sandown Road, between Sunningdale Drive and Parklands Main Road. The project involved relocating underground services from its current position and constructing a new carriageway for a future integrated rapid transport lane. The men who died were aged 22, 40 and 53, according to Western Cape police spokesperson Captain FC van Wyk. He said their colleagues tried to rescue them but were unsuccessful. The company indicated that those staff members involved in the rescue and recovery were also being counselled. “Exeo would like to thank all those who worked deep into the night to assist with guidance, support, equipment and physical help.” The City’s fire and rescue service spokesperson, Jermaine Carelse, said an added complication was that a water pipe had burst, which flooded the trench.  1 The rescue mission became a lengthy recovery mission and the last body was retrieved at 02:00 on Tuesday, said Carelse. The community rallied together to support the officials on the scene. “The neighbourhood watches were there, and they coordinated with refreshments and coffee. They were really helpful,” said Ward 107 councillor Nicky Rheeder. Van Wyk said that once the men’s bodies were retrieved, they were taken to Salt River Mortuary. DM In other news... The South African economy is choking harder than the Proteas. Although to be choking you have to actually be eating and the Proteas seem to be on some sort of juice cleanse-like fast…* Back to the economy: In the first quarter the GDP dive-bombed by a whopping 3.2%. The sense of futility can paralyse us into inaction and moaning. But it’s times like these that call for effort and action, no matter how small. Yes, South Africa is hurting. Yes the ravaged economy is evident everywhere you look. But you can make a difference, in your own personal way and by supporting independent media like Daily Maverick. We’ve pledged to continue the fight through producing incisive and impactful investigations and analysis, the same way we have done every day for the last decade. By becoming a Maverick Insider you can help us keep doing what we do, so that you and others who can’t afford it, can keep reading the truth. For whatever amount you choose, you can support DM and it only takes a minute. Support Daily Maverick→ *Proteas, you know we love you. We’d just love you more if you won occasionally... Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.