Since its inception in 1994, Decorex has grown to become the premier showcase for all things décor in the South African design scene, with exhibitions in Cape Town, Joburg and Durban. From Wednesday the 1st until Sunday the 5th of May, Decorex Cape Town 2019 is taking place at the Cape Town International Convention Centre. At the time of publishing, there are still two more days left to visit the stands. Depending on what you’re looking for, it might be a hit or a miss for you: big homeware and speciality materials companies are showcasing their latest ranges – some might feel déjà vu – and smaller, more artisanal businesses have new products on display; on the peripheries of the exhibition hall, you’ll also spot kitchenware and appliances, as well as art galleries. If a new, fresh and quirky approach to home décor is what you’re after, your best bet would be to focus on the smaller stands featuring local designers and artisans. Below are some of the pieces that piqued our interest; make sure to check them out if you go this weekend. ML 2. Danela Conti 3. Osterwald & Sons  4. SHF   5. Fundi Light & Living 6. 100% Design South Africa  7. 8 Degrees South  Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.