By Alex Dobuzinskis Carter, 94, a Democrat who was elected president in 1976, was accompanied by his wife, Rosalynn, 91, while recovering from the operation, which doctors said was successful, according to a statement from his nonprofit organization, the Carter Center. “Wishing former President Jimmy Carter a speedy recovery from his hip surgery earlier today,” President Donald Trump said on Twitter. “He was in such good spirits when we spoke last month – he will be fine!” The surgery was performed at a medical center in Americus, Georgia, about 10 miles (16 km) east of the Carters’ home in Plains. “President Carter said his main concern is that turkey season ends this week, and he has not reached his limit,” the Carter Center said in its statement. “He hopes the state of Georgia will allow him to roll over the unused limit to next year.” Carter, who was governor of Georgia from 1971 to 1975, served a single four-year term in the White House as the nation’s 39th president. He was defeated in his re-election bid by Republican Ronald Reagan in 1980. The former peanut farmer-turned-politician received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2002 for his humanitarian work. He disclosed in August 2015 that he had been diagnosed with a form of skin cancer called melanoma. In 2017, Carter was briefly hospitalized after suffering dehydration during a trip to Canada. Carter has lived longer after leaving the White House than any former president in U.S. history. (Reporting by Alex Dobuzinskis in Los Angeles; Editing by Steve Gorman, Jonathan Oatis and Leslie Adler) DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.