Many Metrorail carriages have been destroyed by arson. Archive photo: Ashraf Hendricks First published by GroundUp Commuter activist group #UniteBehind has asked why Prasa is not fixing its out-of-service fleet. This follows last month’s unveiling of two new trains. Minister of Transport Blade Nzimande said 95 new trains will be supplied by August 2020. As Prasa focuses on the distribution of new trains, nearly half its countrywide fleet is out-of-service, either for maintenance or because of vandalism, arson and accidents. This is according to the 2020/22 Prasa Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) corporate plan published on 31 March.  1 The number of trains decreased from 288 sets in 2013/14, to 200 by the end of 2017/18. Since then it has decreased to 174, or 60% of the required capacity. (An older report states that Prasa requires 287 train sets.) Of these, 174 available trains, only half have the standard 12 coaches. “This decline happened despite the general overhaul programme and repair interventions that amounted to billions of rand,” according to the document.  1 All of these shortages contribute to the delays that have been plaguing the rail system and affecting commuters for years. According to data in the 2019/21 Prasa MTEF corporate plan, the Western Cape has an average train delay of 21 minutes; KwaZulu-Natal trains have an average delay of 31 minutes; and Gauteng trains have an average delay of 45 minutes. But these data are from 2016. (GroundUp was unable to verify these estimates, and are a little sceptical of them.) Prasa reports that track condition is deteriorating across all regions, as measured by the Track Quality index. This deterioration of infrastructure leads to the implementation of more speed restrictions for the safety of commuters, which then translates into slower trains and increased delays. The delays and overcrowding have caused commuters to become unwilling to buy tickets. According to the 31 March document, Metrorail is recording fewer than 700,000 passenger trips per weekday when it is supposed to be capable of carrying 2.5 to 3-million passengers per day. The estimated number of passenger trips for 2018/19 is 213-million, less than one-third of the number a decade ago. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.