epa07578046 (L-R) Mariama Gassama, Amadou Mbow, Mati Diop, Mame Bineta Sane, Nicole Sougou and Aminata Kane pose during the photocall for 'Atlantics' (Atlantique) at the 72nd annual Cannes Film Festival, in Cannes, France, 17 May 2019. The movie is presented in the Official Competition of the festival which runs from 14 to 25 May. EPA-EFE/JULIEN WARNAND Cannes’ film festival, the world’s most important cinema showcase, last year signed a pledge to get an equal number of men and women in its top management by 2020 that is gradually gathering momentum at similar European and U.S. events. Actors and filmmakers participating in this year’s edition have joined activists in warning that while industry attitudes were changing, progress was still slow. “We have so much work to do and I just think we can’t let up”, Longoria told journalists at the Women in Motion dinner at Cannes, part of a program set up by luxury group Kering to push for gender equality in cinema. “Whenever we see something improving we can’t just say ‘Oh, OK let’s relax, the momentum’s going to go that way’. It won’t continue to go that way, we have to continue to change the industry for ourselves”. Chinese actress Gong Li, the star of Farewell My Concubine, was awarded a prize for her career at the event. At Cannes, four women are contending for this year’s top Palme D’Or film prize, including Franco-Senegalese Mati Diop and France’s Celine Sciamma, out of 21 entries – or just under 20 percent of the total. Elsewhere, the proportion has sometimes been higher, with over 40 percent of the films competing at Berlin’s festival in February made by women. “We hear a lot about how times are changing and improving, and it’s true. The idea is to support that trend. (But) the figures still don’t look good”, said Delphyne Besse, a film sales specialist and one of the founders of 50/50 by 2020, the collective behind the gender parity pledge signed by Cannes. Of the 47 film festivals that have so far backed the drive globally, 38 percent have female heads, according to the lobby group’s figures. Short Shrift Industry insiders said the slow progress was reflected in everything from the short shrift female directors still got in the media to their under-representation at industry events. “Women have been making films for 11 decades now”, British actress and star of zombie movie The Dead Don’t Die, Tilda Swinton told a news conference earlier this week. “There are countless films by women. The question is why don’t we know about them”, she said, adding that even obituaries for female filmmakers tended to be dwarfed by those dedicated to men. Cannes’ organisers have said they were not planning to introduce quotas dictating the gender balance of the films selected to compete at the festival. “Cannes is only at the end of the chain. This needs to start with encouragement at film schools”, festival director Thierry Fremaux said last week. The cinema showcase is looking to include more women on its board, however, and the festival jury this year was more balanced. Atlantics director Diop said festivals were still a logical starting point to highlight women’s work in the industry. “It starts with the films, there is no festival without films, so it is an extraordinary exhibition that will give the films much bigger exposure”, she told Reuters in an interview. ML (Reporting by Sarah White. Editing by Chris Reese)   Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.