In a Polish newspaper interview, Tusk suggested holding another Brexit referendum given the precedent that Britain had already staged two plebiscites on Europe, first in 1975 on whether to stay in the then-European Economic Community that it had joined two years before. If in 2016 it was possible to change the decision made in 1975, it should be possible to hold a second Brexit referendum, said Tusk, who has often voiced sadness at the outcome of the vote, in which 52% voted to leave against 48% to remain. “The real debate on the consequences of Brexit started not before or during the referendum campaign, but after the vote. Today the results would probably look different,” he said in remarks published on the Gazeta Wyborcza daily website. “Paradoxically it is Brexit that triggered a pro-European movement in the UK,” Tusk said. “Today, chances that there will be no Brexit are at 20-30%. That’s a lot.” He was touching on growing uncertainty over how, when or indeed even if Britain quits the EU. Prime Minister Theresa May has thrice failed to get her EU withdrawal agreement ratified by the British parliament so the EU allowed a Brexit delay until the end of October, giving her more time to try to win over lawmakers. But prospects for overcoming the impasse soon appear dim with both her Conservative and main opposition Labour parties split into multiple shades of pro-Leave and pro-Remain factions, with May facing possible leadership challenges. Opinion polls over the past six months have hinted at a shift towards a narrow pro-Remain majority as public debate has aired the economic and political complications of leaving the EU, though analysts say another vote could go either way. Britain will take part in European Parliament elections later this month as a result of having Brexit delayed until Oct. 31. Some see the vote as a new referendum on Brexit, one whose outcome could help block withdrawal – or accelerate it – as the debate on the pros and cons of the move churns on. (Reporting by Marcin Goclowski Editing by Mark Heinrich) DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.