The countries signed an exploration and production sharing agreement for block B2, the second such contract since South Sudan’s independence seven years ago. The deal will help restore oil output to levels of around 350,000 barrels a day, according to South Sudan Oil Minister Ezekiel Gatkuoth. South Sudan is focusing on increasing crude production by using oil blocks that were halted during its civil war. South Africa in November reached an initial agreement to invest $1 billion in its oil sector and Energy Minister Jeff Radebe said in March the move is part of an effort by the country, which is reliant on imports to meet fuel demand, to secure crude supplies. Total SA held a license for block B, a 120,000-square kilometer area the size of the U.S. state of Pennsylvania, but ceased activity in 1985, according to the ministry. The government in 2012 split the block into three licenses: B1, B2 and B3. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.