“I am a bit at ease with that news. I just don’t understand what the motive was. Was it criminal gangsters or were any other elements behind these actions?” Councillor Moses Zulu asked on Thursday. Zulu was speaking to News24 as he travelled to the memorial service for his protectors, Zephania Dladla and Nomasonto Mhlanga, who was killed on Tuesday. They had been guarding Zulu’s residence in Bhambayi, near Phoenix, when they were attacked. Zulu told News24 that he was assigned the protection detail after an assessment by eThekwini Metro and police. He said that service delivery protesters had been marching on the homes of politicians in the province and his was earmarked as one that was in need of protection. “This ends up becoming a security threat to our families. You cannot just march to [a] councillor’s house. It is not an office. There are lots of people in the household who have nothing to do with anything public.” eThekwini Deputy Mayor Fawzia Peer called for the removal of criminals from communities. “I have said it before that killing a police officer is tantamount to high treason. People who are doing that, do not belong to our society, but to prison. I hope our courts will send a clear message to the would-be police killers that taking the life of a police officer and other citizens in general, will not be tolerated in this country.” An integrated operation resulted in the arrest of three suspects people in the early hours of Thursday in KwaMashu. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.