 City finished with 98 points, one point ahead of second-placed Liverpool, who finished the campaign with a 2-0 home victory over Wolverhampton Wanderers. At the conclusion of the highest-quality duel for the title ever seen in the English game, City, with a remarkable 14th straight league victory, came from behind to become the first team since Manchester United in 2009 to earn back-to-back championships. With Liverpool leading 1-0 at home to Wolves, City’s only moment of alarm came when they went 1-0 down at Brighton’s AMEX Stadium to a 27th minute Glenn Murray goal. But Sergio Aguero responded with a goal 83 seconds later and City went on to dominate with Aymeric Laporte heading them ahead before halftime and Riyad Mahrez and Ilkay Gundogan sealing the triumph after the interval. Champions League finalists Liverpool, who won with a double from Sadio Mane, had the consolation of achieving the best-ever performance by a second-placed club in the annals of England’s top flight. (Reporting by Ian Chadband Editing by Toby Davis) DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.