Telkom, which runs South Africa’s biggest fixed-line telecom network, said the group had 15,296 permanent jobs on March 31, down from 17,472 in the year ending March 2018 due to voluntary severance packages, voluntary early retirement packages and other layoffs under the country’s labour law.  1 Some job cuts came from Telkom’s information and communications technology business BCX, where the number of permanent employees fell 13.4% to 5,782 under a cost reduction programme. “We expect the savings from this programme to come through in the next financial year,” Telkom said in its result statement. At 0806 GMT, shares in Telkom were down 1.43% to 85.22 rand ($5.90). Headline earnings per share (HEPS), the main profit measure in South Africa, came in at 722.4 cents for the year until the end of March compared with 589.3 cents a year earlier. HEPS excludes 728 million rand in costs from voluntary severance and retirement packages and layoffs related to section 189 of the labour law. Telkom, 40 percent owned by the state, is seeking to transform the business with heavy investments in its mobile phone unit and by rolling out fibre internet packages. Mobile service revenue climbed 58.3% to 8.2 billion rand, while fixed service revenue fell 8.8%. “The significant growth in mobile service revenue was supported by an 85.9 percent growth in active subscribers to 9.7 million,” Chief Executive Officer Sipho Maseko said. Group earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization rose 8.5%, benefiting from the revenue growth of 5.3% and ongoing sustainable cost management, it said. ($1 = 14.4111 rand) (Reporting by Nqobile Dludla Editing by Sherry Jacob-Phillips and Edmund Blair) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.