Ramosebudi was convicted in the Johannesburg Magistrate’s Court on Tuesday on two counts of attempting to incite to commit conspiracy to murder. In handing down judgment, Magistrate Collin Matshitse said: “[The] State managed to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused attempted to incite the employees to conspire and kill those people he had mentioned in his letters.”  7 Ramosebudi was arrested in Midrand in April 2017. Ramosebudi was facing two counts of incitement to commit murder. However, Matshitse convicted him on the alternative charges of attempting to incite to commit conspiracy to murder.  5 The supposed beneficiaries of state capture included former president Jacob Zuma, four members of the Gupta family, three Cabinet ministers, and the head of the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA).  6 Ramosebudi allegedly sent two letters – to Anglo Platinum and businessman Ajay Gupta, asking for funding for the plot. In the letter he wrote to Ajay Gupta, he allegedly asked for money to assassinate people supporting “white monopoly capital”.  7 He mentioned former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas, former public protector Thuli Madonsela, former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor and former GCIS CEO Themba Maseko.  4 During previous appearances, the court heard that ANC secretary general Ace Magashule and former mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane were among people in the first group he allegedly wanted to assassinate.  9 More to follow. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.