Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi during a media briefing about the province’s schools feeder zones on November 15, 2018 in Johannesburg, South Africa. (Photo by Gallo Images / Sowetan / Mduduzi Ndzingi) Gauteng MEC of Education Panyaza Lesufi announced on Sunday 12 May that the 2020 Online admissions are postponed until 20 May. This comes after the Federation of Associations of Governing Bodies of South Africa (FEDSAS), Suid-Afrikaanse Onderwysunie (SAOU) and other SGB associations raised concerns with the department regarding various aspects of the system.   1 According to the department, a major concern for parents is the system’s failure to make provisions for language. Even though the system provides parents with five options to choose from when applying, there is a concern that a school geographically located closest to the parent’s residential address is provided as a primary choice. This while not considering the language of teaching and learning in that school. Lesufi said these organisations pleaded with the department to delay the opening of the admissions because “they believe that it is necessary to heighten greater awareness on the changes in legislation and admissions processes for public benefit”. A letter sent to the department of education by a law firm representing Afriforum states “when determining feeder zones no regard is given to language preference of learners as language of learning and teaching (LOLT) or language policies of schools as LOLT when parents or legal guardians are offered the opportunity to apply to a school of choice”. This means that when parents apply, there is no indication on the system of a school’s LOLT. Lesufi added that the department did engage thoroughly with all schools involved before the amended feeder zones legislation was published. Furthermore, the department acknowledges that some functions of the system are flawed. “There is one valid point that they tabled that I shared their frustration with. Sometimes the system picks up a school that is outside the feeder zone area that we have legislated. And they are requesting that we review that component,” Lesufi said. Since the technical issue was raised, Lesufi said the HOD convened a meeting with FEDSAS and the technical team of the department to rectify that component, which has since been corrected. Lesufi did, however, assert that even though it may seem like these objections are being raised mainly by Conservative Afrikaner rights groups in a ploy to maintain their status quo, the department will not give room to people who want to destabilise. “If they want us to postpone the online registration so that they can engage us fairly, we are willing to do that. We are willing if they are genuine because there is nothing to hide. I advised the HOD that we must accommodate that and not be seen as people who do not want to negotiate,” said Lesufi. Additionally, the department says it will consider the grievances after consulting with the parties concerned.  1 The system will still be accessible to allow parents to familiarise themselves with it but they will not be able to submit an application. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.