Umlazi residents in Durban blocked roads, demanding a by-election in their ward. (Photo: Musa Binda) First published by GroundUp. About 100 residents of ward 80, Umlazi, in the south of Durban, blocked Sibusiso Mdakane Road with burning tyres on Tuesday, demanding a by-election in their ward. The residents said they did not want to be represented by councillor Mthokozisi Nojiyeza, who had previously faced murder charges. The charges have since been withdrawn for lack of evidence. Nojiyeza has been a councillor for the ward since the local government elections in 2016. He was arrested with two relatives in December 2018. They were accused of plotting the murder of the eThekwini branch’s secretary, Sbusiso Maphumulo, who was shot dead outside his home in V Section, Umlazi, after attending an ANC meeting in October 2018. They were released on Friday after spending about five months in jail. The Umlazi Magistrate’s Court found there was insufficient evidence linking them to the case. One of the leaders of the protest, who asked not to be named, said the residents did not want to be led by someone who had previously faced a serious charge. “We are scared of being led by a leader who has been accused of plotting the murder of another leader. We understand that the court set him free because there was not sufficient evidence directly linking him to the case. But we are also mindful that the court never said he was innocent so we are demanding a by-election where a clean person will be elected,” said the protest leader. The leader added that they were planning to ensure that Nojiyeza’s office stayed closed until their demand was met. Thami Mdluli, a representative from the office of eThekwini Mayor Zandile Gumede, said he would make sure the demand reached the right people within the ANC. Attempts by GroundUp to reach Nojiyeza for comment were unsuccessful. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.