This will be the second time in six months that residents of the Govan Mbeki municipality, which serves towns like Secunda, Bethal, Embalenhle and Trichardt, will have to cope with less water as Rand Water plans to cut its supply by about 80%. This means that residents in high-lying areas like Secunda, Embalenhle and Bethal will bear the brunt as they will be the first to run out of water. In December, these towns had no water for a few weeks after Rand Water closed the taps to force the municipality to pay its outstanding debt, which currently stands at R180m. In January, the council reached an agreement with the bulk water supplier, but it failed to pay the agreed amount of R40m last month, only paying R12m. The residents of the Victor Khanye municipality in Delmas are in a similar position. The municipality, which owes Rand Water R100m, had agreed to pay back R87m but it failed to do so. Rand Water plans to cut the municipality’s water supply to only 20%. In a letter to the municipalities, which News24 has seen, Rand Water indicated that it was disappointed about their lack of cooperation. The company’s spokesperson, Justice Mohale, was approached for comment but he could not respond immediately. Neither Benzi Soko from the Govan Mbeki municipality nor Sentebalent Masimola from the Victor Khanye municipality responded to a request for comment. The DA’s Bosman Grobler said the first thing that newly appointed Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Mandla Msibi should tackle was to stabilise the delivery of basic services in the municipalities, particularly those who were unable to manage the debt they owed to Rand Water and Eskom. KEEP UPDATED on the latest news by subscribing to our FREE newsletter. – FOLLOW News24 on Twitter DM  1 Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.