By Sarah White Filmmaker Abdellatif Kechiche is no stranger to controversy, with his previous outings – including “Blue Is The Warmest Colour”, which won the cinema festival’s top Palme d’Or prize in 2013 – also featuring long, graphic sex scenes. But his latest movie “Mektoub, My Love: Intermezzo”, where the action unfolds almost in real time, left viewers up in arms after its late night premiere on Thursday. Some attendees tweeted that they had left the screening early and posted pictures of a thinned out cinema as the lights came on. Los Angeles Times critic Justin Chang said the movie was “the work of an embattled, controversy-seeking filmmaker who has decided to troll his audience”.  13 “The movie is playing in the main competition, which suggests the festival might be trolling us too,” Chang wrote. A follow-up to 2017’s “Mektoub, My Love: Canto Uno” – which got a more mixed reception though reviewers had already questioned its voyeurism – the film follows a group of young friends in the south of France hanging out and partying. The camera lingers on the bikini-clad women and their bottoms as they frolic in the sea and lounge around in the opening sequence, before the action moves to the nightclub for most of the rest of the film.  1 To a thumping ABBA-laden soundtrack, the women’s dancing takes centre stage in almost hypnotic fashion as they gyrate, make out, and shake their backsides in tiny shorts. The twerking is only broken by a few asides as the friends buy each other drinks and a long cunnilingus scene.  12 “What happens here is nothing more than gratuitous porn,” the Hollywood Reporter’s Boyd van Hoeij wrote, adding that in Kechiche’s other films, the explicit sex moments did not jar as much, building on a much more developed rapport between some of the characters. Others also went to town on the movie and let rip at Kechiche for testing his audience’s patience. “Even when the audience is induced into fits of uncontrollable laughter, they’re still unmistakably the butt of his big joke,” IndieWire’s David Ehrlich said. (Reporting by Sarah White; Editing by Marie-Louise Gumuchian) DM  4 Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.