Illustrative image. Photo: Adobestock We refer to the article published on 3 May 2019 in Daily Maverick by Mike Wills entitled “Kafka, the bank statement and the cellphone company: A mundane story of minor modern fraud”. Mr Wills contacted The Unlimited on 28 February 2019 after his bank informed him that the debit order from his account relates to a product called “Safeguard” belonging to Premier Growth Group, the former name of The Unlimited. Mr Wills laments the fact that the call centre agent “was certainly not interested in shifting my life”, within the context of “Shifting Lives” being The Unlimited’s brand tagline. After listening to a recording of the conversation, it is clear that the agent was very helpful. However, neither Mr Wills’ reference number, ID nor his bank details were reflected on The Unlimited’s database. He was evidently not a client of The Unlimited’s and had not purchased any products from the company. For this reason, it was unreasonable for Mr Wills to have expected the call centre agent to provide any further clarity on his query as he expected. The agent was courteous and helpful and advised Mr Wills to go to his bank. She tried everything possible to be of service to Mr Wills. His disparaging remarks about the agent are unfortunate. We unequivocally refute his allegation that the agent was “not interested” in resolving his issue. Mr Wills’ assertion that the agent said that the issue had nothing to do with The Unlimited and that he should “go away” is completely false. The Unlimited has since engaged with Mr Wills to investigate the source of his problem, double checking his ID, name and banking details on the system. No trace of his credentials and no trace of a debit order from his Standard Bank account paid to The Unlimited was found. Regrettably, Mr Wills’ account of this incident in Daily Maverick leaves the impression that The Unlimited has committed fraud. Nowhere does he indicate that the company has not been deducting funds from his account, had nothing to do with the alleged fraud committed on his account, and is in fact exonerated from any blame. His “opinion” in this regard is therefore ambiguous. The actual facts are, unfortunately, not made clear in his story. The Unlimited is a company built on integrity and trust and refutes the unfounded insinuation in Mr Wills’ story. Debit order fraud costs the country tens of millions of rand annually, which is a huge concern. The Unlimited, as well as other industry role players, is participating in various initiatives of the Payments Association of South Africa, such as DebiCheck, aimed at combating debit order fraud. The Unlimited supports these initiatives and opposes any hint of improper conduct. We understand Mr Wills’ anger, but do not appreciate his misrepresentation of the facts. We will continue, however, to assist Mr Wills to solve the conundrum of his debit order in any way we can. DM Wayne Mann is an executive at The Unlimited. Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.