First published by GroundUp Over 200 people have been left homeless by a fire in S-section informal settlement in Masiphumelele. Community leader Mveliso Nkunkuma said the fire started at about 1am on Sunday after a resident left a candle burning. He said the resident was taken to hospital and treated for burn wounds. “This was not the first time his shack caught on fire because he drinks, but normally the community would see it before it spreads,” said Nkunkuma. The community hall was used for people to sleep in on a stormy Sunday night. Ironically, less than 24 hours after the fire it rained so heavily in Cape Town, it would have been impossible for any fire to spread. Nkunkuma said building kits would be available on Monday.  1 When GroundUp arrived people were sorting through their building materials looking for anything they could reuse. Others had started clearing their sites making way to start building. Some were relatively lucky and were putting their belongings back in their homes. Most people had slept outside in the early hours of Sunday morning after the fire, while others found shelter with friends and relatives. Those who had managed to save their belongings had them packed neatly at the nearby church. Senzele Mxhentsi is a security guard. He was at work when the fire started. He received a call from his neighbours at about 2am on Sunday. “I sat at work the whole night while my house was burning. Everything that I have worked hard for has burnt to ashes,” he said. “All I have is my work uniform. Everything else is gone. I have to start from scratch. I don’t know where to start or where I am going to sleep today.” Monwabisi Stywayi said the fire started about 10 metres from his shack. “We managed to save some things but most were stolen after we saved them. I have been living here for 18 years and this is the fourth fire in that time. I don’t know what we are going to do because my wife and I don’t have a permanent job,” he said. “All that I had took years to get. I feel defeated and confused. This is just too much.”  2 The City of Cape Town’s Safety and Security WhatsApp group confirmed that 119 shacks were destroyed, affecting 211 people. DM  1 Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.