By Steve Gorman Amanda Eller, 35, seated in a wheelchair outside a Maui hospital flanked by her parents, recalled her ordeal at a news conference four days after a helicopter search team found her alive but sun-burned, malnourished and barely able to walk at the bottom of a ravine. Eller, who also works as a physical therapist, was reported missing on May 9, a day after she went for what she thought would be a 3-mile hike in Maui’s Makawao Forest Reserve, only to lose her way in the dense jungle. She recalled lying down on a fallen tree to close her eyes and meditate, then becoming disoriented as she resumed her hike, unsure which direction led back to her car. By the time she was rescued, she had badly injured a knee in a 20-foot tumble down an embankment and suffered cuts and gashes to her ankles, which grew severely swollen and infected. Her shoes were swept away in a flash flood the day after her fall. Rescuers in a helicopter hired by her family ultimately spotted Eller near a waterfall on Friday, miles from where she had parked her car. She was airlifted to a hospital for medical treatment. She acknowledged feeling despair at times, especially when helicopters flew over the forest without spotting her as she frantically waved her arms to draw their attention. That happened about 20 times, she recalled, adding “I felt invisible.” MEDITATED TO KEEP CALM Eller said she used meditation to calm herself and gained strength from what she described as a “very loud clear message” internally urging her on. “You can either sit on that rock and you can die, and you could say, ‘mercy,’ and you could feel pitiful for yourself and play victim, or you can start walking down that waterfall and choose life,” she recounted. Eller said the experience was transformative, and described it as a “spiritual boot camp.” “The whole journey was extremely spiritual for me,” she said. “It was an opportunity to be stripped away of all the comforts of the modern world and see what was left, there was such amazing beauty in that.” Her greatest physical challenges included keeping warm at night, moving about after becoming injured and finding nourishment from plants, some of which she recognized as safe to eat from a book she had read on the subject. At night she would sleep in patches of tall grass, or on large rocks. On occasion, she slept in the abandoned dens of wild boars that roam the forest. Eller said she looks forward to returning to work as soon as possible and expects to be off crutches in about two weeks. Asked what she might do differently on her next outing into the woods, Eller acknowledged she had not been well-prepared for such a hike and that it had been foolish not to take her cell phone with her. “That was ignorant,” she said. (Reporting by Steve Gorman in Los Angeles; editing by Bill Tarrant) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.