6pm The model is still broadly stable around 57.5% nationally, now a tick higher in Gauteng but still holding in around 50.5%.  4 After having climbed very slightly as turnout dropped the ANC vote share in our model is now stable again around 57.5% with a +/-0.9pp error margin. A more mixed density of different demographic voting districts reporting around this time with 46.5% of the projected national vote counted means that the underlying swings can be more stable.  5 The national turnout is now looking to eventually settle around 65% which is a historically low level and would imply that the ANC lost around 1.6million voters (net) vs 2014. The DA will have lost around 620k and the EFF gaining ‘only’ 645k with smaller parties gaining 296k. We had originally thought the EFF would gain around 900k voters on higher turnout. The shock here to the ANC loss of support in raw number terms is seismic and will have deep implications in the part and its branch structure. It also means that as few as 27.5% of eligible voters may actually have ended up voting for the ANC with less than half the eligible population turnout out to vote. We look at both these issues in the new chart below.  4 In Gauteng, as the pace of larger voting districts audited results starts to pick up so we’ve seen actually a very marginal increase in the projected endpoint for the ANC now at 50.56%. The seat allocation has been changing, however,  the ANC is still sitting on the magic 37 majority point.   1 The DA has dropped back both nationally and in Gauteng in our projection but actually, EFF has seen a split, strengthening marginally in Gauteng while dropping back nationally. As we commented on in the last update we don’t think this is a bad result at all for them and their outcome may well have been over-hyped beforehand by both the media and the party itself.  2 Forecast seat allocations are problematic given the key factor in this kind of PR system is the shape of the support curve across intermediately supported parties. As such around this 40-60% of the count mark, things can become very volatile. Hence, in between, these posts updating our model has seen NFP and PAC fall in and out of national assembly seats. VF+, however, seems more stable now around 12 seats (six extra), though much will depend on how they turn out their vote in large urban areas reporting last vs earlier semi-rural areas that have already reported.  1 In Gauteng, it seems unlikely that any smaller party will be able to catch ACDP or IFP as the smallest parties to get seats and so the interplay here is them keeping their second round seat allocations of one each.  1 Error bands are now starting to close around the forecasts fast, but last minute surprises are still possible as major urban centres start reporting in larger size. As such, whilst notionally our model says there is a 79% chance the ANC get an outright majority in Gauteng, we do take this with a pinch of salt. Live national and Gauteng results detail  4 National ANC predicted share and error bands  5 Gauteng ANC predicted share and error bands Changes in number of votes and turnout statistics  1  Source: Daily Maverick, IEC 1pm  2 ANC is showing a small rally back in our adjusted numbers to 57.2%, but still flatlining just on top of 50% in Gauteng. We don’t see the EFF as weak as their raw numbers.  9 With the 20% mark of expected votes reached in Gauteng and nearly 30% overall here is another update of our model.  19 The ANC continues to grind very marginally higher at national level but is flatlining in Gauteng just on the north side of 50%.  3 Overall the ANC looks set still to get around 57.2% of the vote at the end nationally and lose around 20 seats (shifting smaller party results is causing a deviation of around +/- seats here on updates). The EFF now is projected to gain one or two extra seats than ANC loses which is interesting.  11 VF+ is still the other big gainer at a projected six seats increase though as more results for smaller parties comes out where they have pockets of support coming through. This is the complication with a PR system like this, marginal changes in smaller parties can make a big difference. What we can say is that whilst some like PAC and NFP and UDM are losing ground it could come down to the wire if they stay or not. ATM still looks set to get at least one seat. GOOD has now accelerated ahead somewhat to gain around 2-3 projected seats though overall seems to be struggling vs initial expectations.  9 In Gauteng the model is still stable, sitting just above 50% of the vote share but with such low returns still from key areas of the province, confidence bands are still wide. Even as the smaller parties vote shares get added, and ADCP may gain a seat (though on the edge), the ANC is sticking there with right on the number of 37 required for a majority. This clearly could be easily lost and so we still find Gauteng too close to call – albeit the current indication is that the ANC can just make it come.  5 Two key questions: Is EFF weak? No, we see them at 8.9% in raw results and 10.18% in our adjusted model given the underlying swings and type of voting districts declaring. This is a little on the lower side of our pre-election expectations but not outrageously so.  1 Why is turnout falling in the model?   2 The model uses a global turnout assumption which was 72%, then 71% yesterday as we got feedback. Further feedback this morning saw us adjust this to 70%. However, as actual turnout is recorded on completed wards (not voting district) so the model shifts away from the global turnout assumption towards actual. This is now happening.  12 Live national and Gauteng results detail  1 National ANC predicted share and error bands  1 Gauteng ANC predicted share and error bands  1 9.00am A small amount of ANC momentum since the last update, EFF doing quite a bit better than the raw results, overall looking like ANC will still just hold onto a working majority in Gauteng and Nationally at 56.5%.  2 The IEC has progressed further in the last two hours to now count some 15.7% of projected total votes nationally and 8.3% in Gauteng of projected votes there. Our model has been remarkably stable as results come in showing that, accounting for differences in voting district type and turnout etc, the underlying shifts in support are quite consistent. Error margins are still wide however given the still small number of votes counted – they are now around +/- 2.58pp.  2 Turnout estimates have dropped further now to 68.8% on the latest results. Feedback that we have received during voting, especially in townships, seemed to indicate that there was not a particularly strong turnout there vs 2014 and so these headline turnout figures are unlikely to rise much, we think.  2 Nationally the ANC has ticked up very marginally from the last update to 56.48% whilst in Gauteng has also leapfrogged the 50% level to 50.36%. Other party’s support levels are broadly stable, however. There are still wide spreads vs the raw results, especially for the ANC being over-represented in the raw results and the EFF underrepresented. The seat allocations with the current adjusted results have not moved significantly with the ANC still said to gain a majority of seats in Gauteng even on a close vote. The smaller party parliamentary results are fascinating, in particular, the major gains of EFF and VF+, but also the fact that UDM, NFP, PAC and others are being wiped out. ATM is currently showing in our model as getting 2 seats though this will be diluted away towards the end and they may be lucky to get one.  A large cliff edge in the results after 6th position in Gauteng means that the ANC is unlikely to find any bedfellows for coalitions in the province – if required – apart from EFF or IFP.  5 Live national and Gauteng results detail National ANC predicted share and error bands Gauteng ANC predicted share and error bands First live results model 5.30am We currently see the end result for the ANC nationally at 56% on 69% turnout, however with very low confidence given the low number of votes counted. We see the ANC in Gauteng at 49.6% but it could still get a majority of seats just.  4 Calling an election from live, partial, results is a serious challenge in South Africa at the best of times. But given how contested these 2019 elections we wanted to give some flavour of how the results are shaping up and so cutting through the hype that can take over social media and parts of the media when individual (tiny voting station) results are seen. What are we trying to achieve? Our model tries to look at how results that come out differ from 2014 elections and from signals sent by the 2016 elections and subsequent recent by-elections. The model treats partially released results from given wards sceptically (i.e assigns them a lower weight than fully complete wards). The model works off projected turnout at a per vote district level and a range of other assumptions which in turn shift through the process of releasing the results. At each stage of the results, it will give a ‘best guess’ and a confidence limit around that estimate. That confidence limit is important and reflects the uncertainty created by partially released results. As more results get released so that uncertainty cone contracts around the results and things will settle towards the final result.  3 The first batch of results have now come in and we present the results below. There are enough results to make a prediction but with a wide margin of error here. How to read the data? Our tracking model is currently showing with 6.26% of the votes counted the ANC nationally at 56%, losing 24 seats. Note this is an adjusted score based on the underlying trends in the data whilst the raw live results are actually are printing at 52%. This is why adjusting the results and looking at the underlying trends is important to account for the type of VD declaring when through the results process.  EFF is the big winner gaining 22 seats with 10.77% and the DA broadly flat. Note the error bands are very wide given the tiny fraction of the vote. The bands will narrow as more results come in. The confidence bands will tighten markedly particularly as we get to 20% of the votes counted.  8 For Gauteng our estimates so far, though only with a small 3.1% of the projected votes available, we see the ANC only getting 49.6% of the vote but that it can still get a majority of seats (37 of them, there are 73 seats in total so the threshold is 37) given the distribution of smaller parties.  4 Live national and Gauteng results in detail  10 National ANC predicted share and error bands Gauteng ANC predicted share and error bands DM  Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC  Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Source: Daily Maverick, IEC Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.