Trade Tirades The U.S. and China sent dissonant signals on trade, as President Trump struck a hopeful note and Beijing threatened retaliation if Washington hikes tariffs Friday. Just don’t bet on a deal getting done before then, warned Goldman Sachs, putting the chances of higher tariffs at at 60%. JPMorgan’s Jamie Dimon sees a deal coming, just not by Friday. Turning Up The Heat Trump banned trade in Iranian iron, steel, aluminum and copper, ratcheting up tensions hours after Tehran threatened to start enriching uranium again unless Europe throws it an economic lifeline. ( Here’s what its ultimatum means.) As for the oil business sanctions have cost it? Saudi Arabia plans to meet all orders for oil purchases it’s gotten for June—including from countries that had to stop buying Iranian crude, a person familiar said. Pompeo’s Rebuke Now isn’t the time to “go wobbly” on national security, U.S. Secretary of State Michael Pompeo said in London,  admonishing a key ally on China and Iran in a broadside against the U.K.’s approach national security. He risked an unflattering and undiplomatic comparison when he asked leaders to consider what Margaret Thatcher would do and urged them to hurry up and deliver Brexit. Unloved $5.9 Billion Market It’s been a long time coming, but bonds of  debt-ridden borrowing units set up by China’s local governments are finally winning the hearts of international investors. Global investor participation in dollar bonds of local government financing vehicles has increased in recent months, spurred by greater familiarity with the asset class, according to Standard Chartered Plc, one of the top bond underwriters in Asia ex-Japan. The growing issuance of these high-yielding securities means if one wants to beat the regional bond benchmarks, they cannot ignore them, said Alan Roch, its head of Asia bond syndicate. Singapore’s Stock Gems Singapore’s market may be shrinking, but one award-winning stock analyst says there are still plenty of hidden jewels. Jarick Seet, ranked Singapore’s top researcher of small-cap shares by Asiamoney Brokers Poll every year since 2015, published a list this week that highlights 20 of the country’s most promising smaller firms. As if to prove his point, nine of the companies he selected are as yet uncovered by his team at RHB Securities Singapore Pte. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.