Appearing via video-link from the high-security Belmarsh prison, Assange said he wouldn’t agree to go to the U.S. to face charges. American authorities are pursuing extradition so he can face trial on accusations that he conspired with ex-U.S. Army analyst Chelsea Manning to illegally download classified government material. “I do not wish to surrender to America for doing journalism, which has won many awards and affected many people,” Assange said. The case was postponed for a brief procedural hearing on May 30, before a more substantial hearing on June 12, by which time the U.S. is likely to have laid its formal legal documents. “The charge relates to one of the largest compromises of classified information in the history of U.S.,” Ben Brandon, a lawyer representing American authorities, said. It’s the second court appearance in less than 48 hours for Assange, who was sentenced Wednesday to almost a year in jail for skipping bail in another extradition case from accusations in Sweden. Assange was given asylum in the Ecuadorian embassy in London in 2012 before a hearing in the Swedish sexual-assault case. Those charges were dropped in 2017, but Assange remained in a small apartment in the embassy until a change in Ecuadorian leadership — and his vocal criticism of the country and continued leaking of documents — led the embassy to allow police in to arrest him April 11 on the U.K. charges over skipping bail. According to the U.S. indictment, Assange assisted Manning in “hacking a password stored on United States Department of Defense computers.” WikiLeaks published the cables starting in 2010, followed by other documents taken by Manning. The indictment didn’t address a more recent episode involving Assange’s WikiLeaks — its publication of waves of emails that embarrassed Democrats during the 2016 presidential election, a trove that U.S. prosecutors have said were stolen during a Russian intelligence operation.  1 “The full extradition hearing I suspect is still many months away,” District Judge Michael Snow said at Thursday’s hearing. Officials in Sweden haven’t completely given up either. Following Assange’s arrest, a lawyer for one victim asked the Swedish prosecutor to re-open the investigation. The arrest, prosecutors said last month, was “news to us too.” If Sweden does choose to seek Assange, U.K. Home Secretary Sajid Javid would decide which request to address first. He would have to weigh factors including the seriousness of the offenses and the date each warrant was issued, according to U.K. extradition law. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.