“They have withdrawn their names from their list and all formalities have been undertaken accordingly,” ANC national spokesperson Pule Mabe told News24.  2 The two resigned just hours after the ANC held its first caucus meeting on Tuesday, and a day after the ANC announced new presiding officers for the sixth Parliament. The two who were present at the ANC’s special national executive committee on Monday were absent at the Tuesday morning caucus meeting, where party president Cyril Ramaphosa and ANC secretary general Ace Magashule addressed the ANC, along with new chief whip Pemmy Majodina.  2 Mbete, who had been largely criticised by opposition benches for not using her role as speaker to effectively hold former president Jacob Zuma to account, will be succeeded by Thandi Modise – the former National Council of Provinces chairperson. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.