The sports utility vehicle may now be a global phenomenon, but South Africa became SUV territory long before these versatile machines became fashionable.   1 The combination of space, versatility and mild all-terrain capability suits the SA lifestyle to a tee, while the typically raised stance also enhances visibility while adding a commanding sense of security.  The problem is that SUVs – and especially large SUVs – don’t come cheap. As a result, value-hungry buyers increasingly turn to the used car market for their SUV purchases.   1 In its most affordable, Premium-badged guise, the latest Hyundai Santa Fe, launched here late last year, makes a strong case for buying new instead. In relative terms, it’s keenly priced, while an extensive features list underlines that this is no bare-bones model. As a result, the value-for-money quotient is impressive. In other words, this Santa Fe promises a lot of bang for the buck.  In aesthetic terms, it’s an imposing vehicle, thanks to an extrovert front end that links a metallic-patterned grille to an unusual two-tiered lighting layout. The narrow slits flanking the grille are in fact daytime running lights only, while the real headlights live in deep recesses lower down. Small fog lights are mounted even lower, in line with the integrated splitter and brushed alloy scuff plate. The result is a distinctive identity in a segment where ho-hum styling is almost the norm.  The rear’s roof spoiler, V-indented tailgate and stylised apron also deliver an unexpectedly progressive impression. The rest of the execution is more conventional: broad shoulders and a moderately raised stance create a poised, mildly muscular look. Vitally, the exterior execution is broadly the same across the three-model range, which means the Premium version tested here looks every bit as upmarket as its dearer siblings.  That approach is carried through to an interior that’s as smart as it’s spacious. Perforated leather seats ensure a luxurious touch, while there’s an aura of quality, thanks to solid build quality and consistent panel fit. Sure, you’ll find more plastic here than in a premium-sector product of similar size – but at double the price. And most of the touch points are pleasantly padded. There’s nothing fancy about the layout: analogue dials live in an instrument binnacle ahead of the driver, while the infotainment system’s 7-inch colour touchscreen crowns the centre stack.  A multifunction steering wheel provides convenient control of audio, cruise control and Bluetooth-driven hands-free telephony, and the air-con is a full-blown climate control system. There’s nothing entry-level about the equipment list: electric windows, central locking, multi-speaker audio with USB and Bluetooth connectivity, remote central locking, cruise control and park distance control are all included. The infotainment system also features Apple CarPlay and Android Auto. The switchgear could be more ergonomically arranged though, and the touch screen’s perched position and limited screen size are a little disappointing. But after a few days of driving, it all hangs together quite well.  One of Santa Fe’s strongest attributes is the generous interior space, which allows the fitment of three seating rows. The two rearmost seats are stowed under the cargo floor when not in use. To be fair, the third-row seating is cramped from an adult perspective, but perfectly usable by children. There’s also luggage capacity to consider: with the third-row seats upright, you’re left with just 130 litres of cargo space. Fold them away, and cargo capacity increases to a much more feasible 547 litres. Need to transport the kitchen sink? Fold the second-row bench flat, and a capacious 1,625 litres is at your disposal.  Six airbags, ABS brakes and electronic stability control are among the key safety features, together with hill start assistance and downhill braking control. You have to make do with halogen headlights, though – LED headlights only become standard with the midrange Executive model. In short, the Santa Fe Premium’s cabin is spacious, comfortable and comprehensively equipped, despite being the most affordable member of the clan. And so, the value proposition is particularly persuasive.  Powering the Santa Fe is the same 2.2-litre turbodiesel as the outgoing model. It’s rated at 142kW and 440Nm, and thanks to decent low-down shove, there’s ample pep. The engine also provides incisive midrange punch, so that progress remains brisk, regardless of the operating conditions. The eight-speed auto gearbox is a new addition, though, replacing the previous six-speeder, and delivering a better-stacked array of ratios, together with a smoother shift action. The extra cogs keep the engine on the boil more effectively and also allow for slightly more relaxed open-road cruising.  The Premium derivative is front-wheel driven (only the flagship Elite version gets all-wheel drive), which means it’s a more urban warrior than true all-terrainer. That’s further emphasised by a rather humble 185mm ground clearance. In and around town, you’re always aware that this is a large SUV. That said, the steering is quick, and the 11.4m turning circle makes for good manoeuvrability in tight spaces. Visibility from the raised driving position also contributes to overall ease of use, and despite its size, the Hyundai never feels out of sorts in urban environments.  Stretch its legs on the open road, and the Santa Fe covers ground with unfussed ease, almost regardless of the terrain. It’s as at home on smooth highway tar as it is on pockmarked country roads, and while the suspension is on the soft side, the big SUV remains reassuringly composed. Good suspension damping ensures a comfortable ride, but the new chassis’ inherent rigidity benefits handling: the Santa Fe remains settled through sweeps and curves, and body lean is tidily contained.  Despite its front-wheel drive and limited ground clearance, the Hyundai is certainly game for gravel roads. However, the road-biased tyres are a further limitation, with sidewall damage an ever-present danger when negotiating rocky terrain. Overall refinement is commendable and a significant step up from its predecessor, adding to the Santa Fe’s appeal.  Arguably the most impressive attribute of the Hyundai Santa Fe Premium is its value proposition. For just under R600,000 you get a vehicle that ticks a lot of boxes in comfort, convenience, safety and dynamic terms. Its most obvious rivals are the bakkie-based Toyota Fortuner, Ford Everest and Pajero Sport, which fare better in the rough stuff, but can’t match the Santa Fe for comfort and refinement. The closely related Kia Sorento should also be considered. Add a class-leading five-year/150,000km warrant and five-year/90,000km service plan, and the result is a large, comfortable and competent softroader that flies the bang for the buck flag with pride. DM PROS Excellent value for money. Competent in most areas that really matter. CONS Limited all-terrain capability. VITAL STATS Hyundai Santa Fe 2.2 CRDI Premium Engine In-line four-cylinder, 2,199cc, turbodiesel Power 142kW @ 3,800rpm Torque 440Nm @ 1,750 – 2,750rpm Power-to-weight ratio 78.67 kW/ton Gearbox Eight-speed automatic, FWD Wheels/tyres 18-inch alloy, 235/60 R18 tyres 0-100 km/h 9.4sec Top speed 203km/h Fuel tank capacity 80 litres Fuel consumption (claimed/tested) 7.8 / 8.8 litres/100km Operating range (claimed/tested) 1,025 / 909km CO2 emissions 200g/km Warranty 5-year/150,000km warranty Service/maintenance plan 5-year/90,000km service plan Retail price R599,900 Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.