By David Shepardson The committee said the hearing to be held by its aviation subcommittee will be on the “status of the Boeing 737 MAX.” The committee did not disclose the witnesses. Representative Peter DeFazio, who chairs the panel, told reporters on Tuesday he planned to hold a hearing on the Boeing 737 MAX and the certification process in the near future. The hearing is expected to include Acting FAA Administrator Dan Elwell, National Transportation Safety Board chairman Robert Sumwalt and Earl Lawrence, who was named executive director of the FAA’s Aircraft Certification Service in 2018, sources told Reuters. The FAA plans a May 23 meeting with top civil aviation officials from around the world to discuss the 737 MAX. On Wednesday, FAA officials held a briefing with members of the committee and staff on how the certification process works. Representative Rick Larsen, a Democrat who chairs the aviation subcommittee, told Reuters he expects the FAA will not unground the planes without the backing of international regulators. “I don’t think there’s a chance the FAA moves without the international community,” Larsen said. Last month, U.S. Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao named a panel of experts to a blue-ribbon committee to review the aircraft certification process after deadly Boeing 737 MAX crashes in October and March killed nearly 350 people. The MAX fleet was grounded March 13. “346 people died in two separate crashes. There ought to be a lot of pressure on Boeing and the FAA to get this right,” Larsen said. In a March 28 memo to Elwell reviewed by Reuters, Chao said she wanted an “action plan” from the FAA “to reassure congressional oversight committees that the FAA’s culture of safety remains not only robust but forward-looking” and to restore “public trust in aviation safety.” She also asked what “measures are needed to reinforce the culture of safety and constantly improve the FAA’s oversight functions and offices, including the certification process.” The FAA has for decades delegated some certification duties to Boeing and other manufacturers. Separately, Senate Commerce Committee chairman Roger Wicker told Reuters on Wednesday he still plans to call Boeing Chief Executive Dennis Muilenburg to testify at a future date. “I think he’ll want to,” Wicker said. Boeing declined to comment. Federal prosecutors, the Transportation Department’s inspector general and lawmakers are investigating the FAA’s certification of the 737 MAX 8 aircraft.  2 A joint review by 10 governmental air regulators of the MAX’s certification started on Monday in Seattle. Sumwalt said in March the NTSB was also examining the certification process “to ensure any deficiencies are captured and addressed.”  2 Boeing has told some 737 MAX owners it is targeting U.S. FAA approval of its software fix as early as late May and the ungrounding of the aircraft around mid-July, two sources told Reuters last month. Boeing has not yet formally submitted the software fix to the FAA for approval. U.S. carriers have canceled flights because of the 737 MAX grounding through early August. (Reporting by David Shepardson Editing by Tom Brown and Bill Berkrot) Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.