* Ruling party returned to power in election * Lowest parliamentary vote share since 1994 * Ramaphosa says ANC has learned from mistakes (Adds Ramaphosa quotes, context) By Alexander Winning The ANC won 57.5% of the parliamentary vote and retained power in eight of nine provinces in President Cyril Ramaphosa’s first poll test since taking power in February 2018. The result was the ANC’s worst performance in a parliamentary vote since the end of white minority rule in 1994, when it swept to power under Nelson Mandela. But it was at least an improvement on its vote share in local government elections in 2016. To supporters of Ramaphosa, the victory was an endorsement of his anti-graft agenda after replacing Jacob Zuma. “Ramaphosa has done the right thing by targeting corruption. It helped us win the election,” said Tlaleng Radebe, 45, an ANC member from Soweto township on the outskirts of Johannesburg. Another ANC member, Themba Shabalala, 39, said he wanted to see Ramaphosa, a union leader turned business tycoon, rid the country of the “scourge of unemployment.” Around 27 percent of South Africans do not have jobs, according to one definition of unemployment. RAMAPHOSA PROMISES GROWTH Radebe and Shabalala were part of a crowd of several thousand wearing the ANC colours of black, green and gold outside the party’s headquarters, Luthuli House. Music blared from speakers and people waved party flags before Ramaphosa and other officials addressed them. “This election was a most decisive election for us. We have learned our lessons, we have heard the people of South Africa,” Ramaphosa, 66, told the crowd to cheers. “We are going to make sure we inject growth into our economy, we are going to invite investors to come and invest, we are going to make sure we give the young people of our country great opportunities,” he added. Ramaphosa’s first full term as president should start later this month after his nomination by ANC lawmakers in the new parliament. He replaced Zuma as ANC leader in December 2017, after a decade in which the party’s image was tarnished by corruption scandals and weak economic growth. He became head of state after persuading senior ANC officials to instruct Zuma to resign before Zuma’s presidential term was due to end. Some analysts think last week’s election result will leave Ramaphosa short of ammunition to battle party rivals who oppose his reforms to tackle corruption and galvanise the economy. Others say he did well to win a narrow majority in Gauteng province, the country’s economic hub where Johannesburg is located and where the ANC was under pressure. “Gauteng was our biggest challenge,” Ramaphosa said. “It does not matter how you get there, as long as you get there.” Acknowledging that turnout at the election was lower than previous votes at around 65 percent, he urged more people to cast ballots next time. The ANC achieved its best parliamentary election result in 2004 under former president Thabo Mbeki, when it won more than 69% of the vote. (Reporting by Alexander Winning; Editing by Keith Weir and Andrew Cawthorne) DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.