Grabouw farm workers, who have been protesting since 6 May, suspended their protest action on Wednesday. Photo: Ashraf Hendricks First published by GroundUp Children returned to school on Wednesday morning and the N2 highway near Sir Lowry’s Pass was open as Grabouw farm workers suspended their protest action during negotiations with their employer. “We have suspended the action” said Karel Swart of the Commercial, Stevedoring, Agricultural and Allied Workers Union (CSAAWU). Since 6 May, more than 60 farm workers from Oak Valley Estate in Grabouw have been protesting for a wage increase to R250 per day, an end to labour brokering, and the removal of single sex hostels. The farm workers are being supported by CSAAWU and some community members. Swart said the protest action had been suspended because Oak Valley Estate had agreed “to come to the table”. Those involved in the meeting include union representatives, leaders of the protesting farm workers, Oak Valley Estate management and the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) commissioner. Christopher Rawbone-Viljoen, managing director of Oak Valley Estate, said in previous meetings the farm had suggested reviewing seasonal contracts and investigating whether workers were “eligible for permanency on the basis of rolling contracts”. He said they were waiting for more information from the labour brokers. Rawbone-Viljoen said that CSAAWU had not presented any proposals, only demands, and that the farm had tried on several occasions to reach a mediated settlement. “In our view, given their demands, they are not interested in a mediated settlement.” he said. On Tuesday, protests caused a divide in the community as roads were closed and schools were disrupted. Some community members felt that they were being “held hostage”. Nine people were arrested on Monday, said Lieutenant Colonel Andre Traut of the SAPS. “One for incitement to commit violence and eight for public violence,” he said. Traut said that police would continue to monitor the situation. Swart was one of those arrested but was later released. He said if those arrested remained locked up, the protest might resume. He said he had told the station commander, “If you don’t drop the charges there will be no peace”. DM   Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.