Unemployment and joblessness will, once again, be one of the pressing issues facing the incoming sixth democratic Parliament of South Africa. Just a week after elections, Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) revealed that 237,000 people lost their jobs in the first quarter of this year — coinciding with politicians being on the election trail. The ANC has promised to create 275,000 jobs a year, while the DA claims it will ensure each household has at least one earning member. And the EFFs manifesto is themed around “our land and jobs now”. Officially, there are 6.2-million citizens who are classified as unemployed, according to the report released by Stats SA this week. In a labour force of only 22.5-million that means 27.6% of South Africans are out of work. In comparison, unemployment in the UK is approximately 3.8% despite the economic turmoil of Brexit; 24.5% of Namibians are unemployed, and Zimbabwe has an “official” unemployment rate of about 5%.  The number for the official definition of unemployment is 27.6%, but in reality there are many more South Africans without work. On top of the unemployment rate, Stats SA classifies an additional 15.8-million people as not economically active. Within this group 3-million people are discouraged from seeking work, while the other 12.8-million do not fit the definition of employed or unemployed. Many of these discouraged work seekers are young people trying to enter the job market. Speaking at the Goldman Sachs Investor Conference on 15 May, Cyril Ramaphosa again highlighted the issue of youth unemployment, and the impact unemployment has on youth apathy. “After years of being prevented from getting into various skills and professions, [youth] now get those. The doors of learning, universities and colleges, have been opened. They go to these institutions, they come out with certificates and degrees and they don’t get jobs,” Ramaphosa said. In an attempt to rectify this issue, the ANC’s manifesto promises to provide not just jobs, but decent jobs, particularly for women and young people. And yet young women are most at risk of being unemployed. According to the report, four in every 10 young women in South Africa are not in employment, education or training (NEET).   The expanded definition of unemployment includes people who are unemployed and people who are not economically active. This puts the total percentage of people without jobs in South Africa at 38%, a 1.3% increase from this time last year. Overall, at least 22-million South Africans do not have an income. That is 22-million people who are able to work, but are either too discouraged to try and find work or are currently, albeit unsuccessfully, searching for a job. With a total population of nearly 57-million, Ramaphosa has a difficult job on his hands. The ANC promises to create 275,000 jobs a year, but with a loss of 237,000 in just three months, things are not looking good. DM See also: Jobless and Hopeless: drastic times call for drastic measures Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.