In this file photo from April 2018, a protesting resident of Mahikeng holds up his hands to avoid being shot at by police as violence continued in the capital of the North West province. Picture: Daily Maverick Police Minister Bheki Cele has warned that areas within the North West and KwaZulu-Natal provinces are being viewed as potential trouble zones in advance of the 8 May elections. Speaking at the Government Communication and Information System offices in Pretoria, Cele said: “Through our intelligence operations hot spots in the country have been identified and will be prioritised. The highest risk areas are the North West and KwaZulu-Natal”. On Thursday 2 May, the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security Cluster (JCPS) briefed the media on the state of readiness for the upcoming general elections. Cele said the motivation to flag these two provinces as high risk stems from the activities that have been unfolding. “It is not the duty of the police to interfere with peaceful marches. We come in where there [are] violent actions where it begins to interfere with the constitutional rights of other people. So these two provinces seem to be high on that, especially KZN, [where] there are still areas where there is political violence and blockage,” said Cele. Some of the areas flagged as high risk in KZN are Ilembe, Lindelani, KwaDukuza, Ndwendwe and a township in Vryheid called Bhekuzulu. “Already there has been a pre-deployment there. We have sent some platoons and some sections in those specific areas to make sure that there is a pre-stabilisation,” Cele said. In North West, the areas flagged are Bloemhof and Brits. This is after politicians were barred from entering the province and two buses were burnt, according to the police minister. “They are high risk because there is a lot of interference with the political and constitutional rights of other people,” said Cele. Furthermore, a total of 51,306 police officers will be deployed to the various voting stations on election day. In addition, the minister said 3,504 reservist police officers will be deployed nationwide. Even though the North West and KwaZulu-Natal have been pinned as high risk, Cele said all other provinces have the same basic security system in place. The identification of risk is ranked according to low, medium and high. All provinces will have some form of risk. The country has been faced with a surge of service delivery protests in the run-up to elections. In some instances, protesters have threatened to disrupt election day. Cele said: “Police officers will monitor all forms of protestation or shutdowns to ensure that no individual’s constitutional right will be infringed.” In Gauteng, Alexandra has been identified as high risk especially after the shutdown protests which took place in early April. At Thursday’s briefing, journalists also heard that Home Affairs will be issuing more than 300 identity documents in the Eastern Cape and 121 in KwaZulu-Natal in order to enable people who lost them during the recent floods to vote. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.