President Cyril Ramaphosa has made the fight against corruption a priority and his commitment to establishing a directorate within the National Prosecuting Authority aimed at dealing with corruption is a step in the right direction. What can big business do to work in tandem with the government in the fight against corruption? On 27 June, we will address the issues of fighting corruption and policy implementation for sustainable economic growth. “Business Against Corruption” will be a day for business leaders to discuss topics pivotal to corruption, ranging from fighting corruption at a government as well as private sector level, and the responsibility to create a safe space for whistleblowers, to name only a few. “BLSA commits to putting its resources to such a cause because it is against corruption, malfeasance, fraud and state capture whether it is happening in the public or private sector. That’s the reason why we decided to be part of this project – and hold corporate citizenries accountable” says BLSA CEO, Bonang Mohale. 10X Investments, the disruptive asset manager and event co-sponsor, welcomed Daily Maverick’s decision to turn the spotlight on to business after lifting the lid on state capture and other corrupt practices. “Daily Maverick has done great work bringing corruption and dishonesty in the political sphere to the public’s attention. The authorities have had no choice but to start acting against perpetrators,” said Steven Nathan, 10X’s founder and chief executive officer. “I believe that business leaders should be held to the same high standards.” Nathan added that while much corruption within the government and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) had been exposed, people forget that it takes two to tango and that there are two sides to corruption. Now, more than ever it is crucial for businesses to become more vocal and play a proactive role in fighting corruption at all levels. The event aims to help mobilise business to take a more proactive stance against corruption and to help build a stronger, more inclusive economy. Speakers highlights include: “This is an important event for Daily Maverick, as we have been committed to the continued fight against corruption. Scorpio, our investigative journalism arm was formed with the clear objective of bringing corruption cases to light. Our journalists work around the clock to ensure all leads are investigated thoroughly,” says Tim Cohen, editor of Business Maverick. The event takes place on June 27 at Summer lace in Hyde Park. Only a limited amount of tickets are still available. Visit Quicket to book your ticket today. Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.