By Joseph Ax The thousands of so-called “Yang Gang” members who braved cold and rain to attend the candidate’s rally in New York City on Tuesday evening shouted his name in reply, showing his eclectic campaign is catching on with some voters. The 44-year-old entrepreneur, philanthropist and self-described nerd launched his long-shot bid more than a year ago, centered on a proposal to give every American $1,000 a month in cash. Since then, he has rolled out more than 100 policy ideas, a technocratic approach rivaled in sheer wonkiness perhaps only by that of U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts among the Democratic candidates seeking the 2020 nomination. “I liked that he was a very policies-first kind of guy,” said Chris Nguyen, 28, who attended the rally and is considering backing Yang over U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders, his choice in the 2016 presidential election. “He wasn’t just anti-Trump,” Nguyen said of Yang. “He ran on the issues.” Yang’s odds of victory remain long against better-known and better-funded candidates such as Biden, a former vice president. Yang is drawing around 1 percent support among voters in national polls, on a par with experienced politicians like U.S. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Washington Governor Jay Inslee. A native of upstate New York and the son of Taiwanese immigrants, Yang would be the first Asian-American president. He has embraced social media, and Andrew Yang memes have proliferated on Reddit and Twitter. His campaign received a major boost after a lengthy February interview with comedian Joe Rogan’s popular podcast. Yang’s biggest proposal is what’s known as a universal basic income, or UBI, a concept that in recent years has gained traction within certain academic circles. Under his “Freedom Dividend” plan, every adult American would receive $1,000 a month regardless of income or work status, a cash infusion he says is the best way to combat the destruction of manufacturing and other jobs due to automation. The proposal would be funded by a European-style value-added tax that Yang says would ensure technology companies pay their fair share. At the rally, Yang – who often sports a “MATH” hat in a nod to his devotion to numbers – rattled off the industries that were using machines to replace millions of humans: truck driving, retail stores and customer service call centers. “Donald Trump is our president for one simple reason: Automation did away with 4 million manufacturing jobs,” mostly in states like Pennsylvania and Michigan that were key to Trump’s 2016 victory, Yang said. Tyler Riley, a 27-year-old from Weehawken, New Jersey, said Yang’s argument resonated with him. “A lot of candidates focus on immigration, but automation is doing a lot more damage to jobs than any immigrants coming into the U.S.,” he said. Yang’s platform includes a dizzying mix of standard Democratic fare like Medicare-for-all; voting reform proposals like eliminating gerrymandering or making the Electoral College proportional; and seemingly quirky concepts such as subsidizing marriage counseling, giving everyone $100 to donate to charity and establishing a $1 billion journalism fund to support struggling local news outlets. He has proposed cutting 10 percent of U.S. military spending and redirecting the funds to a domestic infrastructure force known as – in all seriousness – the Legion of Builders and Destroyers. The legion’s commander would have the power to override local regulations in pursuing massive improvement projects. Yang has leaned into his political outsider status, coining the slogan “Not Left, not Right, Forward,” and emphasizing his experience running an education startup company eventually acquired by test-prep giant Kaplan. Some supporters said they would consider his campaign a success if it brings some of his policy proposals to the forefront. “Even if he doesn’t win, it’s OK – his ideas are there,” said Kai Wong, a 27-year-old physical therapy doctoral student at New York University. (Reporting by Joseph Ax; editing by Jonathan Oatis Editing by Colleen Jenkins) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.