(Recasts with climber being taken into police custody) Television channels ran live shots as rescuers perched on the 324-metre (1,063-foot) tower’s wrought-iron struts, just below the highest viewing platform, tried to persuade the unknown man to give himself up. The tower’s operator said he had entered the monument normally before climbing over the safety fencing on the second level and clambering up the outside of the tower. “At 21:30, Paris firefighters succeeded in reasoning with the individual and he is now in the hands of the competent authorities,” the operator said. Police cordoned off several streets closest to the tower as crowds of onlookers gazed up at the perilous operation which began mid-afternoon. The lattice tower, named after its designer and builder Gustave Eiffel, is one of the world’s most recognisable landmarks. It was constructed between 1887 and 1889 and is as high as an 81-storey building. The Eiffel Tower will re-open on Tuesday. (Reporting by Sophie Louet and Richard Lough; Editing by Andrew Cawthorne and James Dalgleish) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.