ANC supporters and the Siyangqoba Rally at Ellis Park Stadium in Johannesburg, 5 May 2019. (Photo: Greg Nicolson) The governing party’s rally differed from those of the other parties in a number of ways. Among the most noticeable was the number of police officers deployed to stand at entrance checkpoints while others were seated in their cars, watching from a distance. Another difference was the taxi with the long queue of people waiting to get in. The taxi was not going anywhere, but instead was staffed by members of the Aids Healthcare Foundation (AHF) who were offering HIV tests. Next to the taxi was an AHF tent where people were directed to go to for counselling before they received their results. So while ANC national executive committee members were being introduced to a packed stadium inside, some ANC members were making potentially life-altering decisions while others were busy selling ANC merchandise and food to those loitering around. Commerce was buzzing. If you are lucky enough — and by that I mean if you have money or know the right people — as a street vendor you can get a permit to sell goods inside the gates, but outside the stadium. The less fortunate must join the long row of other vendors who lined Beit Street, going into the Ellis Park Stadium. There are also those who sell on the move while carrying their merchandise and so are lucky to hit the jackpot by selling where people are seated inside. ANC Premier David Makhura spoke of the province’s achievements over the past four years. According to the premier, under the leadership of the ANC Gauteng is the only province to receive “unqualified audits” from the Auditor-General. Furthermore, he said the province alone was responsible for providing 42% of the youth jobs in the country. Makhura went on to declare to the crowd that the ANC would not surrender the province to anyone after the elections. Ramaphosa continued with his message of renewal for the party and restoring the “credibility” of the ANC by defeating “corruption and State Capture”. He gave the Zondo Commission, the NPA and SAPS as examples of the work being done to have “effectiveness” in government. Ramaphosa went on to thank ANC volunteers for all of their hard work during the election season and further encouraged members to vote for the ANC. Further up on Beit Street, just a traffic light from the stadium, some ANC members had not bothered to go to listen to the president. Kwa-SHEBA kitchen and The Edge Restaurant and Bar were flanked by ANC members who were seated, drinking and singing. What usually is a somewhat quiet street was invaded by a sea of green, yellow and black. “These businesses are gonna make money today,” quipped a local resident passing by upon seeing the crowd of ANC members. Putco buses blocked Siemens Street, all the way up to Saratoga Avenue. The buses were parked two by two on the road and under the bridge connecting Joe Slovo Drive. ANC members walked about with a cup or bottle of liquor in one hand while singing and dancing. Some were seated comfortably on the lawns by the side of the road, chatting and enjoying the breeze. It is going to be a fascinating election on 8 May, to see whether this once unstoppable giant that declared confidently that it would rule “until Jesus comes” will continue its hold on power or if its constant efforts of renewal have alienated a once deeply loyal electorate. There were those ANC members who fervently believed in the party who stood in the scorching heat to listen to the speeches and reaffirm their support. And there were those who, although they remain loyal, were not bothered about what was happening on the inside and might not even show up to the polls on voting day. The ANC faces a Herculean task of winning back apathetic supporters and attracting young new voters at a time when its credibility has been severely eroded by corruption and lack of service delivery. To 8 May we go. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.