DURBAN, SOUTH AFRICA – JUNE 09: Gwede Mantashe addresses the audience during the party’s cancelled KwaZulu-Natal provincial consultative conference on June 09, 2018 in Durban, South Africa. The conference was called off after disruptions on Friday night which saw the party’s national chairperson‚ Gwede Mantashe‚ being booed and prevented from addressing delegates. (Photo by Gallo Images / Daily Sun / Jabulani Langa) Mantashe reluctantly appeared before the commission with party deputy president David Mabuza on Friday, party spokesperson Dakota Legote confirmed to News24. News24 reported on Wednesday Mabuza had requested that his swearing in as a member of the National Assembly be postponed following allegations that he had brought the party into disrepute. The decision followed an ANC integrity commission report, tabled at the party’s special national executive committee (NEC) meeting on Monday. “The deputy president made the request in light of a report by the ANC Integrity Commission in which he is alleged to have prejudiced the integrity of the ANC and brought the organisation into disrepute. The deputy president has indicated he would like to have an opportunity to address the integrity commission on these allegations,” an ANC statement read. Sources told News24 that Mantashe, who was flagged in the report along with 21 other members including ANC Women’s League president Bathabile Dlamini, was at first reluctant to appear before the commission but was later persuaded. Legoete confirmed to News24 that the rest of the 20 members will start appearing from Sunday until Monday morning. Own accord A source said Mabuza, unlike Mantashe, volunteered to drop out of the swearing at parliament. “Mabuza went on his own accord. He has his issues but I respect him for this decision. He said their issues should not burden the president or the organization, others refused, including the national chair, it will be interesting to hear their explanations,” the source said earlier last week. Another source close to Mantashe said he was flagged for allegations made against him at the Zondo commission that he benefited from corruption when Bosasa allegedly did security upgrades at his two homes. “He told the commission his side of the story. He even explained that in order to clear his name, he sent cameras to his homes. He has subjected himself to the media and he is willing to go and testify at the commission. He has done enough, I expect he will be cleared,” the source said. The source said Mantashe will most likely make it into Ramaphosa’s newly trimmed cabinet that is expected to be announced on Monday afternoon. Weeks of horse-trading within the top six will also likely ensure Mabuza returns to his position as second in command, the insider said. Mabuza’s future There has been widespread speculation over Mabuza’s future. Mabuza was initially punted to be deployed at Luthuli House to be Ramaphosa’s eyes and ears as secretary general Ace Magashule works to consolidate his defence at the party headquarters. With Zizi Kodwa, Fikile Mbalula and Senzo Mchunu likely to become central figures in Ramaphosa’s new cabinet, Luthuli House will be left unguarded, one source believed to be in Ramaphosa’s camp told News24. “He would have been ideal to help run the organisation. The focus has been government while Ace has been running Luthuli House to the ground. If Mabuza was there it would have helped but I think he is going back.” On Friday, the Public Protector cleared Mabuza in two of her reports, according to News24. Busisiwe Mkhwebane found that he was not involved in the irregular procurement of four luxury vehicles worth R5m for his office when he was Mpumalanga premier. He was also cleared of involvement in the Mpumalanga government’s event management contract for former president Nelson Mandela’s memorial service. On Saturday, EFF leader Julius Malema said Ramaphosa would be making a mistake if he does not name David Mabuza as his deputy. “If you make that mistake of not appointing DD, you won’t make it past the National General Council. As a president, you must always put your deputy next to you. If he wants peace, we all know how it started before Polokwane. Zuma said I want to clear [my name] but behind the scenes he said to us, they forced me out and we came charging.” DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.