Western Cape Premier Alan Winde listens to Marikana settlement leader Joseph Makeleni. Photo: Velani Ludidi    Less First published by GroundUp Western Cape Premier Alan Winde had just announced his new cabinet when about 200 residents of Marikana informal settlement protested outside the provincial legislature on Thursday 23 May 2019. The residents want the City of Cape Town to buy or expropriate the land they have been living on since 2013. They also want the City to stop its appeal against a 2017 Western Cape High Court order to purchase the private land. The residents marched to the civic centre for the same reason on 24 April, but say their memorandum was not attended to. “The municipality is aware of the memorandum, but they have been busy with elections and did not respond to us,” said leader Joseph Makeleni. “Our problems are not waiting while the municipality drags its feet. There is crime in Marikana due to lack of street lights and electricity. We want water. We want proper roads. We want development projects to be directed to Marikana and wish to remind the municipality that Marikana is our permanent residence. We are not going anywhere,” said Makeleni. Nolukholo Cawe said being a resident in Marikana is difficult. “Crime is so high in the area. The police are trying , but criminals target us, especially at night. If these services can be put into our area we would have a better life.” Winde came out to accept the memorandum, but said he could not promise to respond in five days. “I do not have my office yet,” he said. “But before going into the document which you have brought here, I want us to try something different. Before marching to the legislature ask your leadership to make a call to me. Invite me for coffee. I want us to start to work differently. Call me, I will even come there. I want to make this province much better than it was before.” Makeleni said the marchers wanted “action more than talk”. “Everyone can talk, but few can act. We will see after five days if Alan Winde will act on his promise; in fact, we will call him and ask if he can live in such a settlement.” DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.