Having lost the first leg in London 1-0, Tottenham got off to the worst possible start in Amsterdam by going 2-0 down on the night. The second leg turned on its head after halftime, however, as Lucas Moura scored twice in quick succession before netting a 96th minute effort to complete his hat-trick and make it 3-3 on aggregate. “It was a non-tactical performance, it was more of a fight, more of a heart performance, and that’s how we won it,” Danish playmaker Eriksen told BT Sport. “It was a ridiculous game. We were really far down, we tried to fight back and we’re just lucky. I feel sorry for Ajax, they played a very good game against us. “In the end we’re just lucky we scored. It’s a relief, because we’ve been fighting for this and I think it’s a dream for everyone to be in the Champions League final.” The midfielder revealed that there was no great tactical change at halftime as Spurs simply rolled up their sleeves and went at Ajax in the second half. “We weren’t able to look ourselves in the mirror if we (were to) go down three or four nil today – we had to fight back, there was no other option,” Eriksen said. After Liverpool fought back from a 3-0 first-leg defeat to beat Barcelona 4-3 on aggregate on Tuesday, the final will be an all-English affair. LIVERPOOL INSPIRATION Spurs defender Danny Rose said that he had taken inspiration from the Merseysiders. “We saw Liverpool last night. It goes to show it’s not over until it’s over. Disappointed with the first leg, how we started and we started like that tonight. But after the break we came out,” Rose said. “The gaffer mentioned Liverpool’s display at the hotel before the match — the gaffer doesn’t mind us losing but we have to lose the right way.” Moura, however, was not prepared to let the match slip, and slotted the winner for Spurs deep in stoppage time. “It’s been a rollercoaster of a season. For him (Moura) to get us in the final, he’ll be a hero. I hope he gets a statue in England after this … I’m blown away, there’s really no words for it,” Eriksen said. There was one major tactical shift that did play a crucial role in the victory, however. At half-time Pochettino took out midfielder Victor Wanyama and replaced him with Spanish forward Fernando Llorente. Llorente, whose main asset is his height and strength in the air, placed himself on Ajax defender Daley Blind and that upset the solidity of the Dutch defence. The Spaniard’s presence caused confusion and created instability which Moura was able to exploit to the full. With a big man as a focal point for the attack, Tottenham were able to take a more direct approach — with crosses from deep and in the latter stages, hopeful punts into the box. Llorente would not have been on the field had Spurs’ first choice striker Harry Kane been fit but the injured England captain was in the dressing room at the break and he said the focus was purely on effort. “At half time we said it is 45 minutes to give everything… the lads dug deep, showed passion, showed character, showed heart and that is what it’s all about,” said Kane. “Over the two legs we didn’t play as well as we would have liked but we found a way to win,” he added. Former England and Manchester United defender Rio Ferdinand, in Amsterdam as a pundit for BT Sport, said the Llorente introduction had been key. “Fernando Llorente – what a substitution. He stood on Daley Blind. Blind couldn’t deal with him and the boys came up behind him.” (Reporting by Philip O’Connor and Simon Evans, editing by Toby Davis and Pritha Sarkar) DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.