Stuart Baxter, coach of South Africa, during the 2019 Africa Cup of Nations and Cosafa Cup South Africa team announcement at Safa House, Johannesburg, on 21 May 2019 ©Muzi Ntombela/BackpagePix    Less South Africa senior national team coach Stuart Baxter has announced a preliminary 30-man squad for the upcoming Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) tournament, which gets under way in exactly a month.  1 Bafana Bafana, who are in the so-called group of death with Ivory Coast, Morocco and neighbours Namibia, get their tournament under way on 24 June in Cairo, where they will take on 2015 champions, Ivory Coast. One of the surprise inclusions was Cape Town City forward Kermit Erasmus. In 2015, Erasmus told then Bafana coach Shakes Mashaba that he was not a backup player after being put on a standby list by the coach. That being said, Erasmus brings a wealth of experience to the squad, and has been a player rejuvenated under Benni McCarthy at City after joining in January this year. Fortune Makaringe, who was a source of light in a struggling Maritzburg United team this season, has also been rewarded with a call-up.   1 Premier Soccer League player of the season, Thembinkosi Lorch of Orlando Pirates, was also unsurprisingly included. Lorch said after winning the accolade that he hoped his success would convince Baxter to play him more regularly going forward. With veteran goalkeeper Itumeleng Khune still out, after having missed half of the season with injury, the keeper spot is very much up for grabs. Recently crowned PSL goalkeeper of the season, Ronwen Williams, will be competing with Bidvest Wits’s Darren Keet to see who will don the number one jersey. There was a place for Orlando Pirates midfield hard-man, Ben Motshwari, whom Baxter said “has been consistent and has shown good mentality to go with the good of the match”. Nikola Tavares of Crystal Palace in England and Joel Unteresee of FC Zurich in Switzerland are also included in the squad, but their involvement depends on whether they receive their passports in time. The announcement ran concurrently with that of the upcoming Council of Southern Africa Football Associations (Cosafa) cup, in which the under-23 team will participate in place of Bafana. Baxter said Keagan Dolly and Reyaad Pieterse had been included in the Cosafa squad so that they can get some minutes under their belt prior to Afcon. Dolly, who plays in the French league for Montepellier, has been plagued by injury this past season, but could be a key member at Afcon if he is fully fit. Baxter has just under a month to finalise his 23-man squad before the team departs for Egypt on 12 June 2019. Full squad Goalkeepers: Darren Keet (Bidvest Wits), Ronwen Williams (Supersport United), Bruce Bvuma (Kaizer Chiefs). Defenders: Daniel Cardoso (Kaizer Chiefs), Rivaldo Coetzee (Mamelodi Sundowns), Ramahlwe Mphahlele (Kaizer Chiefs), Thulani Hlatshwayo (Bidvest Wits), Innocent Maela (Orlando Pirates), S’Fiso Hlanti (Bidvest Wits), Buhle Mkhawanazi (Bidvest Wits), Thamsanqa Mkhize (Cape Town City). Midfielders: Bongani Zungu (Amiens), Hlompho Kekana (Downs), Dean Furman (Supersport United), Kamohelo Mokotjo (Brentford), Tiyani Mabunda (Mamelodi Sundowns), Thulani Serero (Vitesse), Thembinkosi Lorch (Orlando Pirates), Themba Zwane (Mamelodi Sundowns), Fortune Makaringe (Maritzburg United), Ben Motshwari (Orlando Pirates), Keagan Dolly (Montepellier) Strikers: Lebo Mothiba (Strasbourg), Percy Tau (Royal St. Union), Lars Veldwijk (Sparta Rotterdam), Lebogang Maboe (Mamelodi Sundowns), Sibusiso Vilakazi (Mamelodi Sundowns), Kermit Erasmus (Cape Town City). DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.