File Photo: Then Western Cape MEC for economic opportunities Alan Winde has been announced as the Democratic Alliance's candidate for premier by DA leader Mmusi Maimane in Cape Town, 19 September 2018. Photo: Leila Dougan Following a long campaign since September 2018, Alan Winde was formally inaugurated as Western Cape premier on Wednesday afternoon, becoming the second DA premier in the province, following the reign of Helen Zille who held the position for two five year terms from 2009.   3 With a 55% majority, the DA held on to the province  which was the site of much contestation ahead of the 8 May national and provincial elections. The ANC is the official opposition, under the leadership of Cameron Dugmore.  Seat allocation of the Western Cape provincial legislature The election of premier, speaker and deputy speaker did not go smoothly for the DA, as the official opposition in the legislature, the ANC decided to field candidates of their own for these positions. The DA employed a similar strategy in the National Assembly where it is the opposition. Cameron Dugmore, Patronella Lekker and Lulama Mvimbi were nominated by ANC MPLs for the position of premier, speaker and deputy speaker respectively. Ultimately the positions, based on majority votes went to Winde, Masixole Mnqasela and Beverley Schäfer. New EFF MPLs Melikhaye Xego and Nosipho Makamba-Botya as well as sole ACDP MPL, Ferlon Christians abstained from voting for the speaker and deputy speaker of the legislature. Christians, the former chair of the Public Accounts committee within the legislature, also chose to abstain from the voting of Dugmore or Winde as premier. Winde was voted in as premier with 24 votes, while Dugmore received 10 votes. There were six spoiled ballots and one abstention. Meanwhile, the ANC’s head of elections Ebrahim Rasool chose not to take up his seat in the legislature. In a statement sent out as the vote for premier was underway, Rasool said: “When I was asked to lead the Elections Campaign of the African National Congress (ANC) in the Western Cape Province, it was never with the intention to return to the Western Cape Provincial Legislature, but simply to help stem the ANC’s slide in the province and rebuild trust and excitement behind the renewal project headed by President Cyril Ramaphosa in the Western Cape. Anything more would be a bonus.” Rasool’s seat on the ANC bench will go to the next person on the party’s list – Ayanda Bans. Winde is expected to hit the ground running, by announcing his new provincial Cabinet on Thursday. Three new names are expected to replace MPLs who have been deployed in other capacities or, like Transport and Public Works MEC Donald Grant, have declined their legislature seats. DM  Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.