The U.S. were on the back foot for much of the first half but hit New Zealand with a two-goal burst before the break and piled on the punishment after. Tobin Heath opened the scoring at 34 minutes when she side-footed home from close range to complete a nice move started down the left. Rose Lavelle doubled the lead five minues later when she finished off a similar move and cross from the left flank. With a range of experienced replacements, the U.S. dominated the second half and 36-year-old substitute Lloyd scored two close range goals in the 62nd and 83rd minutes before Sam Mewis rounded off the scoring six minutes from time. Winners of the 1991, 1999 and 2015 World Cups, the U.S. play Mexico on May 26 before heading to France to face Group F opponents Thailand, Chile and Sweden. New Zealand open their World Cup against the Netherlands on June 11 before facing Canada and Cameroon. The tournament kicks off on June 7 when hosts France play South Korea. (Reporting by Andrew Downie; Editing by Ian Ransom) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.