About 5% of the nation’s pig population has been culled as the number of infected provinces and cities increased to 42, the government said on its website. The epidemic will likely continue expanding to other locations and bigger farms, according to the agricultural ministry’s forecasts. The rainy season and subsequent flooding in the southwestern region of the Mekong Delta has exacerbated the spread of the disease and affected the burial of culled animals. Even in areas where there have been no new cases for at least 30 days, outbreaks may recur, the government said. The government said it has received feedback on a higher compensation rate for affected farmers. The current rate of 38,000 dong ($1.62) per kilogram for live hogs is prompting farmers to hide or delay reports of infections. They also try to sell infected animals. In Dong Nai province, known as the “pig capital” of Vietnam, authorities will prosecute farmers who had fought against the culling of their sickened pigs. Slaughtering infected pigs for meat is still occurring there, the government said. The Deadly African Virus That’s Killing Asia’s Pigs: QuickTake The government is encouraging the rearing of poultry, cattle and other livestock to make up for possible shortage of pork. Agriculture Minister Nguyen Xuan Cuong is ordering large and small farms whose pigs have been infected to stop breeding hogs for now. The ministry is directing local governments to help those pig farmers find new livelihoods. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.