Shahan Ramkissoon It’s the fourth elections he has covered since 1999 and Shahan Ramkissoon, a news anchor at eNCA, has noticed that this time around, the elections are “more exciting” because voters have more options. However, as he travelled across the country during the eNCA town hall debates, he “noticed that people are disinterested” in politics and “are asking why should they vote”. There are 36.5 million people eligible to vote in South Africa, of which 26 million registered to vote, with a projected 65% turn out. “We should be concerned about the lack of participation in elections,” said Ramkissoon. Reflecting on the elections so far, he said news networks needed to “give people more of a voice” and “a bigger platform” rather than “elevating the voices of politicians”. He added that “journalists have become too friendly with politicians”, which made it difficult to be “objective” and also seem as if journalists were “being harsh” when they “ask tough questions”. “There is a line that has been crossed,” said Ramkissoon. Veronica Makhoali Wits Radio Academy news anchor and content producer Veronica Makhoali was a “little bit disappointed in the way journalists have covered the elections” as they unduly focused on “the big three political parties”. She produces content for community radio stations and she said she agreed with the grievances of the smaller parties, which held a press conference on Thursday to protest against the election results because of poor media coverage and ‘election rigging’. The small parties came from communities and knew people’s struggles. The mainstream media, such as SABC, eNCA and Newzroom Afrika, had failed to uplift these parties and to inform people of the many options, she said. Makhoali was also “disappointed” with the IEC following reports that a voting station in the Western Cape did not open. At a press briefing, the IEC had said it was not aware of this, said Makhoali. “This is an infringement of people’s rights to vote.” The IEC needed to incorporate fourth industrial revolution technology into the voting process, she added, instead of using “outdated methods” such as ink markers, which had proven to be unreliable. Clement Manyathela Post-election events were intriguing and worth keeping an eye on, said Clement Manyathela, a journalist at Eyewitness News. There wasn’t “the usual hype of elections” in the run-up to the vote, he said, although it did pick up closer to 8 May. What he was interested in now were how the results were showing that the internal battles within the ANC and DA had influenced their overall results. There was an “anticipation” regarding what would happen to DA leader Mmusi Maimane now that the party had lost some votes compared to 2014, Manyathela said, as well as what the party was going to do to win back the support that went to FF+. “Are they going to change their policy on land?” Manyathela was also keeping an eye on the type of cabinet President Ramaphosa would appoint and how much influence the ANC National Executive Committee would have on the cabinet. The committee had much to do with recommending people to be included. The most difficult issue at the Results Operation Centre, Manyathela said, was how tough it was to get a comment from the IEC. As the current host of the Xolani Gwala radio show on 702, he was not able to interview the IEC commissioners to explain how the counting was going. However, he did understand as they were dealing with issues such as double voting and removable ink. Marianne Merten Daily Maverick senior journalist Marianne Merten said journalists should not “be shy to ask difficult questions”, and then ask “a second question and then follow up if the answer does not make sense”. The questions should be short, precise and to the point. It was a politician’s job to “explain their policy positions” and answer questions. “Real politics is about the boring stuff; it is about policy,” said Merten. Over the many years she had covered elections, the IEC had been consistent in its cordial relationship with the media. “What is special is that everyone is sharing the same space” at the results centre. The ministers did not sit secluded with bodyguards but were given the same treatment as everyone else – one small desk, desktop computer and a few chairs. It did not matter whether you were a representative of the government or a small party, said Merten. Reflecting on this year’s elections, she was concerned that the voter turnout was at 65%. “The voters are telling politicians something.” At the time of writing this, it is still going to be some wait into the night at the results centre, with the dashboard showing 94% of voting stations counted so far. Journalists will continue to binge on coffee and conversation as they wait for the next IEC update. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.