  The gold sector has been anticipating a wave of asset sales in the wake of Barrick’s $5.4 billion acquisition of Randgold and a second mega-merger that created Newmont Goldcorp Corp. The newly combined giants were expected to put several unloved mines up for sale, leaving lots of room for maneuvering by company executives who have missed out on the dealmaking. “It’s not a fire-sale, it’s a considered process,” Bristow said in a separate interview with Bloomberg TV. “We’ll work with those stakeholders, and we will let the market know when we’re ready to let them know once we’ve got a way forward for each of those assets.” The objective is for the sale process to be well advanced by mid-2020, Barrick said in its first-quarter earnings statement, its first results since its acquisition of Randgold was completed. Barrick will focus on finding the right buyers for its assets and is willing to help them manage the mines during a transition period, if required, Bristow told BTV. Some of the assets Barrick is selling are in countries that the company still wants to invest in, he says. In the meantime, the Toronto-based miner also won’t hesitate to “pick up other assets” that may be available. Barrick said its joint venture agreement with Newmont is expected to close by the end of the quarter. In March, Barrick withdrew a $17.8 billion hostile bid for Newmont after negotiating the joint venture combining most of their assets in Nevada. Barrick has a 61.5 percent stake in the JV to Newmont Goldcorp’s 38.5%. Barrick also said it will declare a quarterly dividend of 4 cents a share.  Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.