Disney announced last week that it had scheduled “Star Wars” movies for December 2022, 2024 and 2026 but did not reveal any other details. Those will be the first “Star Wars” films after “Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker” in December 2019. Speaking at an investor conference on Tuesday, Chief Executive Bob Iger confirmed that the 2022 film would come from David Benioff and D.B. Weiss, the creators of medieval fantasy series “Game of Thrones.” He did not provide any other details. Disney has said the series will tell a story separate from the Skywalker saga that began with the original 1977 “Star Wars” film. The company also has announced a separate “Star Wars” trilogy in the works by “Star Wars: The Last Jedi” director Rian Johnson. No release date has been unveiled. (Reporting by Lisa Richwine and Vibhuti Sharma; Editing by Dan Grebler) DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.