With more than one million votes, the DA secured their crown jewel – Western Cape, with 98% of votes in the province captured. At a final media briefing in Cape Town on Friday, the IEC in the province revealed voter turnout was 66.6%, but this lowered turnout rate was still enough to secure a DA majority. Courtney Sampson, IEC Western Cape provincial electoral officer, said the 66% turnout was 6% less compared to the 2014 elections. During the briefing, Sampson told Alan Winde, the DA premier candidate in the province: “Alan Winde, you may now become the next premier candidate if your colleagues in the legislature decide to vote for you.” But for Winde and the party, there are issues the party needs to address in the province. Winde told Daily Maverick he and his team, in the next coming days, will make“more concrete” plans on core campaign issues – public transport, policing, safety and crime. Alan Winde was MEC for Community Safety before the election. ANC Head of Elections Ebrahim Rasool, said the DA needed to focus on housing and will keep a tight squeeze on the party’s promises on crime. Internally for the ANC, Rasool said the most important part was now for the ANC to create a “good, strong and activist opposition” in the legislature. The third biggest party in the province, the EFF told Daily Maverick the DA needed to focus on land for housing, sanitation, water and electricity. Melikhaya Xego, EFF provincial chairperson, told Daily Maverick that while the party had accepted that they had not won the province, they had “shown growth” in the province. In 2014, the party had won 2.11% of the vote – but provisional results show the party is at 3,98%.   1 Ultimately, the “DA must, first of all, go down to the people,” said Xego. In fourth place is Good, with 3%,  in fifth place ACDP at 2.66% and FF+ in sixth  place at 1.57%. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.