ANC supporters at the party's Siyanqoba Rally hold a mock coffin representing opposition party the DA. Photo: Greg Nicolson    Less   President Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday addressed the ANC’s Siyanqoba Rally ahead of the 2019 elections. He urged voters to get to the polls and support the ANC. The ANC has been marred by factional battles ahead of the 2019 elections with some critics doubting President Cyril Ramaphosa’s ability to reform the party while leaders like Secretary General Ace Magashule and Deputy Secretary-General Jessie Duarte still hold influence in the party. An ANC supporter at the party’s Siyanqoba rally ahead of the 2019 elections. Motorcyclists roared their engines at the DA’s Phetogo Rally at Dobsonville Stadium on Saturday ahead of party leader Mmusi Maimane’s address. A DA supporter at the party’s Phetogo Rally celebrates as supporters wait to hear from party leader Mmusi Maimane. DA party leader Mmusi Maimane addressed supporters at the party’s final rally ahead of the 2019 elections at Dobsonville Stadium on Saturday. EFF supporters at Orlando Stadium held a cardboard makeshift coffin draped in an ANC t-shirt at the party’s final rally ahead of the elections at Orlando Stadium on Saturday. “Ramaphosa shouldn’t be in the Union Buildings, he should be in Sun City prison,” said EFF leader Julius Malema. Bikers at EFF’s final rally ahead of the elections got supporters ready for EFF leader Julius Malema to walk around Orlando Stadium and address supporters. EFF leader Julius Malema and other EFF members walked around Orlando Stadium on Sunday, occasionally stopping to dance with supporters. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.