Workers logging and packing textbooks at the Department of Education warehouse in Polokwane, South Africa on June 27, 2012 (Photo by Gallo Images / Sowetan / Elijar Mushiana) One of the many challenges that schools face is the shortage of textbooks. Since the introduction of the CAPS curriculum, the Department of Basic Education (DBE) has spent billions on textbooks for schools. Despite the large sums of money allocated to textbook purchases each year, schools continue to suffer from shortages. There are five main reasons for these shortages: The DBE has plans to develop its own textbooks (recently there was a lot of media attention on the DBE’s new Life Orientation textbooks and sex education), so that it can save costs and ensure that schools have greater access to textbooks. This might sound like a noble plan, but the unintended consequences will undermine teachers and have a knock-on effect on the economy. Consequences include: There is a much more sustainable way of achieving universal textbook coverage: These proposed solutions will help to ensure that: Instead of pursuing a state publishing programme, the DBE should divert its energy towards updating the curriculum, calling for new textbooks to be developed, issuing a new textbook catalogue and implementing a national procurement process that still allows for teacher choice. Universal access to textbooks is a fundamental right, but State publishing is not the answer. DM Warren Kliphuis is chairperson of the Publishers’ Association of South Africa’s Education Sector. The views expressed are his own. Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.