Striking Oak Valley workers and police have clashed during protests. Photo: Ashraf Hendricks Negotiations between Oak Valley Estate and the Commercial, Stevedoring, Agricultural and Allied Workers Union (CSAAWU) appear to be deadlocked. Since 6 May protests have blocked the N2 outside Grabouw. There have been several clashes between police and protesters. There are also divisions between Grabouw’s township residents over the protests. But last week the workers suspended the protests pending negotiations with Oak Valley. CSAAWU’s Karel Swart said negotiations were deadlocked on the question of wage increases following meetings between Oak Valley management, the union, farm workers and Grabouw residents. Swart did however say that progress had been made on the secondary demands for eradication of labour brokers and hostels. The workers are demanding R250 a day. Swart said that the issue of single-sex hostels had now become a “human rights issue”. He said he didn’t expect this to be solved overnight but the farm had “25 years to correct the situation”. Bahia Sterris, Acting Provincial Manager of the South African Human Rights Commission, confirmed that the commission is investigating the “the discriminatory nature” of “a Grabouw farm’s” hostels. Oak Valley Estate employs over 270 permanent workers and is home to over 470 people. Swart said that over 450 workers have downed tools and the “farm is quiet”. But Christopher Rawbone-Viljoen, Managing Director of Oak Valley denied that the workers are still on strike. He said that most employees had returned to work although the “situation remains tense”. Rawbone-Viljoen said that Oak Valley had suffered a loss of production and damage to property from the strike. He said that on 20 May, an interdict was obtained from the Western Cape High Court ordering the union and its members to “refrain from any intimidating and violent conduct”. Farm workers and union members are expected to march to Oak Valley Estate again on Friday. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.