Democratic Alliance (DA) leader Mmusi Maimane (R) addresses the crowd during what was billed as the final DA rally prior to the elections held in Soweto, Johannesburg, South Africa, 04 May 2019. EPA-EFE/KIM LUDBROOK Forget Ramaphoria – at a tent set up by the DA on sports fields in KwaMashu on Tuesday morning, Mamainemania was in the air. A small but passionate crowd of DA supporters greeted the party leader as if he were a rock star on arrival, with several wearing kangas adorned with Mamaine’s face. A grinning Maimane, flanked by the DA’s KZN Premier candidate Zwakele Mncwango and the DA’s chief whip in Parliament John Steenhuisen, seemed in good spirits with less than 24 hours to go before the 8 May polls open. Asked by Daily Maverick if the DA had chosen the location for their final rally in response to the SA Institute of Race Relations’s eleventh-hour poll suggesting that the ANC may lose its majority in KwaZulu-Natal, Maimane said that the province had been a priority for the party from the start. “That’s why I’m here on the eve of elections,” Maimane said. “I’ve been coming here nearly every week in this campaign. I’ve been in KZN, we’ve been working the ground.” He suggested that the SAIRR’s poll might not go far enough in its predictions: “I can tell you, the ANC is in deep trouble.” Maimane denied that the DA had focused its KZN campaigning in Indian areas like Chatsworth, saying that the party was not interested in targeting any particular race group: “We are the only party that will grow in Chatsworth as we will in Umlazi.” Earlier in the day, several DA leaders at the event had voiced concerns about the potential for dirty tricks during this year’s elections. DA MP Dianne Kohler-Barnard told Daily Maverick that they had received reports from some DA voters of ballot sheets not being stamped on the back, which is required to happen immediately before the sheets are issued to voters. “They knew from our warnings, check the back, check the back, and went rushing back to get them stamped. People are aware and politically motivated,” Kohler-Barnard said. Chief whip Steenhuisen told the DA supporters gathered in KwaMashu that they must “watch carefully” during the voting process to make sure all protocols were observed. “You must watch these guys, they’ve been in the corruption business for 25 years,” Steenhuisen told the crowd. “Ama-Gupta!” yelled an audience member in agreement. The IFP has also been warning supporters of potential electoral fraud, with leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi hinting at the possibility of an unfair election – although Buthelezi has made this accusation at regular intervals since 1994. In April, City Press reported on an IFP regional leader telling supporters: “The ANC looks quiet but they are busy plotting how to steal the election and manipulate the voters’ roll.” With KwaZulu-Natal also identified as a potential hot spot for election violence, there are particular anxieties from opposition politicians in this province that voting may not proceed in a free and fair manner at all voting stations. “It is a deep concern,” Maimane told Daily Maverick. “I think South Africans must be vigilant. More than anything, make sure all ballots are stamped twice. Already, we’ve got intelligence about how there have been some manipulations, including what type of ink is being used. We’ve had some concerns about how special votes have been conducted.” On Tuesday morning, the IEC released a statement in which it said it was investigating “reports of instances of the double envelope system not being used in some special voting yesterday as well as some ballot papers which may not have been stamped at the back”. Depending on the outcome of its investigations, the IEC said it would “make a decision on whether these votes are included in the count or not”. It also called on party agents and voters to take potential problems at voting stations to the presiding electoral officer on duty. “Providing as much detail of any incident – including where and when it occurred – would significantly speed up the investigation process,” the IEC said. In Maimane’s view, voters themselves are often the best line of defence against electoral fraud. “We are calling on all South Africans: be vigilant,” the DA leader said.  DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.