U.S. stocks plummeted the most since March as investors fretted about what Trump’s tariff threat might mean for trade talks with China. Asian equity futures indicated the selloff would extend. There’d been a long stretch of calm and steady gains for U.S. equities, but, just like that, volatility returned. Perhaps traders should worry about a different set of numbers. Christine Lagarde thought relations between China and the U.S were getting better, and that their trade talks were crawling toward the finish line. “We hope that is still the case but today rumors, tweets and comments are not very favorable,” the IMF chief said on Bloomberg TV.  As for machines and quant traders, they’re striking a wait-and-see stance. This year is shaping up to be the biggest by far for defaults in China’s $13 trillion bond market, highlighting the widening fallout from the government’s campaign to rein in leverage. Companies defaulted on 39.2 billion yuan ($5.8 billion) of domestic bonds in the first four months of the year, some 3.4 times the total for the same period of 2018, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Fed Vice Chairman Richard Clarida pushed back against speculation the central bank will cut rates to boost softening inflation. “I don’t think we’re at that place now,” he said, echoing Jerome Powell’s take that the recent dip in prices is transitory. He added that both the U.S. economy and monetary policy are in “a good place.” One bank that’s a lock to cut: the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, which is expected to cut interest rates today to fresh historic lows. Trump insists tariffs on Chinese imports will help the U.S. economy and be paid mostly by China. Economists would beg to differ. Just before the threatened levies are due to take effect, China’s top trade negotiator Liu He will head to the U.S. for high-stakes talks. Whatever happens, it probably won’t stop a historic shift that’s seen developing countries disrupt global trade. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.