Members of Patricia De Lille's GOOD party watch the IEC results trickle in at the National Results Operations Centre in Pretoria on Thursday 9 May 2019. Photo: Leila Dougan Early tallies show that the Democratic Alliance is set to govern the province for the third straight term but one of many thorns in its side, GOOD leader Patricia de Lille, has notched up some support. By 1pm, newcomers GOOD had 34,000 votes, placed fourth in the rush for seats in the provincial legislature. In addition to the fourth place in the province, the party is placed seventh overall nationally, with only 37% of voting districts counted thus far. Brett Herron, secretary-general of the party, told Daily Maverick on Thursday that despite the votes being a “long way from finalised” — and the party needed to be cautious at the moment about maintaining this success — “we would be very much happy”. The party had every reason to be happy — it was formed in December and had been campaigning for around four months and still managed to score 34,034 out of 1.1 million votes. In Beaufort West, the party managed to score a voting district — coincidentally, this is where party leader Patricia de Lille grew up as a child. “We should get a mayor in there,” he said jokingly. Herron described the win as “ very exciting,” and said every area in the province — rural or urban — was important to the party. Each area was unique in it’s challenges and attributes, said Herron. “We don’t take any votes for granted,” said the secretary-general. Vote counting still continues nationally, while 38.7% voting districts have completed counting thus far. In the Western Cape, large areas still needed to be counted, including voting districts within the Cape Town metro. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.