It is understood that the University of the Free State’s security services cited supposed security concerns when it made the call on Wednesday to call off a talk on the book Gangster State scheduled for next week. The panel discussion was due to be held at the UFS campus on Thursday 23 May in conjunction with its business school, the Association for Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE), book retailer Exclusive Books and Penguin Random House, the publisher of the book penned by investigative journalist Pieter-Louis Myburgh. An email from a staffer at the UFS business school sent to Penguin on Wednesday mentioned supposed security concerns raised by the university’s security services, without divulging any further details. “You are free to go ahead with the event, on the same time and date, but not on campus,” the UFS Business School staffer wrote in her email to Penguin. On Wednesday night, Helena van Zyl, director of the UFS Business School, told Daily Maverick that the university’s security services “suggested that we postpone the event to the year’s second semester”. She did not elaborate on the reason behind the decision and referred Daily Maverick to the UFS security services for further comment. The cancellation of the event is the third instance in which a scheduled launch event for the book has been disrupted or prohibited from taking place. At the first launch of Gangster State at an Exclusive Books branch in Sandton City in early April, apparent ANC Youth League members and supporters of ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule disrupted the event to such an extent that it had to be cancelled. The following week, Exclusive Books and the V&A Waterfront in Cape Town cited supposed security concerns when it decided to pull the plug on a second launch event. Gangster State largely deals with Magashule’s alleged corrupt dealings in his former role as premier of the Free State. On Wednesday night, Free State radio station OFM quoted ANC Youth League spokesperson Sello Peterson as saying the league would have relished the opportunity to engage Myburgh intellectually on what Peterson claimed were falsehoods and lies in the book. “In our view, we would have been very happy to form part of that nonsensical lecture because we are prepared to go and expose it for what it is. For the university to postpone it is not really a train smash. It’s assisting because, like we said before, the book does not belong in the [archives of] our history, it does not belong anywhere within the intellectual discourse because it’s fiction, which must be understood as the rubbish which it is.” However, referring to the risk assessment conducted by the university’s security services, Peterson reportedly said no place in the country should be declared a no-go zone. “We would have welcomed that white boy to come to the province and engage [with] him,” the radio station quoted Peterson as saying. The UFS’s decision to bar next week’s event from taking place comes in the same month in which media institutions and journalists the world over celebrated World Press Freedom Day. Myburgh said he found out about the development when he was contacted by a journalist from OFM. “The UFS or the other organisers did not even have the courtesy to call or email me or Penguin Random House,” said Myburgh. Penguin Random House said in a statement that it was stunned that UFS had cancelled the public book event, which had been advertised for some time. The company’s CEO, Steve Connolly, said: “We believe the university cancelled the event on the advice of the security department there. It is the university’s role to stand up for free speech, and the security office is there to defend that right if necessary. “Obviously we do not have all the details, but this has all the hallmarks of cowardice in the face of pressure to cancel the event from powerful forces in the Free State,” said Connolly. Attempts to reach UFS communications director Lacea Loader for comment on Wednesday night were not successful. DM The author of the book, Pieter Louis Myburgh, is an investigative journalist with Daily Maverick’s Scorpio. Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.