Photo by Justin Lane The invitation-only event, famed for its A-list celebrities and haute couture gowns, is a benefit for New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art and also marks the opening of the Costume Institute’s annual fashion exhibit. Gaga shed her blazing pink Brandon Maxwell gown on the red carpet to reveal a strapless black gown by the designer. Next came a figure-hugging hot pink gown. Her final reveal before a makeup touch-up on the carpet was a black bra, panties and sky-high platform boots. “Roar” singer Katy Perry came dressed as a chandelier, even wearing one on her head. “I like to be of the light and obviously be the light, she said about her 40-pound costume by Moschino. Anna Wintour, the American Vogue editor-in-chief who hosts fashion’s biggest night each year, was one of the first up the red-carpet-turned-pink for the evening wearing a shimmering Chanel gown topped by a cape of pink feathers that was tipped in black, a nod to the night’s mascot, a flamingo. Camp, a theme that embraces humor, exaggeration and liberal interpretation, was inspired by writer Susan Sontag’s 1964 essay “Notes on ‘Camp.'” Trends on the pink carpet included gold lame and sequins, feathers, neon, and oversized sleeves, skirts and trains. Performer Billy Porter, dressed in head-to-toe gold, summoned ancient Egypt when he was carried into the gala on a litter by six shirtless men. The night’s fashion also referenced camp icons including a glittery high-collared cape by designer Christian Siriano intended to pay tribute to the late Vegas showman Liberace. Singer Celine Dion wore a feathered headpiece and full-length fringe by Oscar de la Renta that was reminiscent of a Cher costume. Kris Jenner, mother and manager of reality stars Kim and Khloe Kardashian, told reporters on the red carpet she was channeling singer David Bowie in a coat with wings made of tulle over a blue Tommy Hilfiger jumpsuit. The front man of British brand “One Direction” and gala co-host Harry Styles arrived wearing a black Gucci ensemble with mesh detail on the top and painted black fingernails. Tennis star Serena Williams stayed true to her brand, pairing Nike sneakers with a custom neon yellow dress from Italian fashion house Versace. Others with the sought-after invitation to dinner for 550included NFL star quarterback Tom Brady and his supermodel wife Gisele Bündchen, singer and actress Jennifer Lopez and comedian Chris Rock, and the billionaire CEO of Amazon.com Jeff Bezos. ML (Reporting by Melissa Fares in New York; writing by AnnaDriver; editing by Leslie Adler) Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.