President Donald Trump’s top trade negotiator said the U.S. plans to raise tariffs on Chinese goods Friday, accusing Beijing of backpedaling on commitments it made in negotiations and confirming the substance of Trump’s weekend threats. People familiar said he made them after being told Chinese officials had refused to agree to a deal that required changes to Chinese law, a change with big implications for provisions aimed at ending China’s practice of forcing U.S. companies to share proprietary technology. The U.S. thought those issues were resolved. Still, talks will continue, U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer said. U.S. futures fell and Asian stocks are set to fall after Lighthizer’s comments. The Chinese yuan dropped. Prior to his remarks, U.S. stocks had pared losses from a sell-off sparked by Trump’s threat to escalate the trade war, with investors taking solace from news that China will still attend talks this week. S&P 500 futures dropped 0.7 percent in Asian trading after a rollercoaster session in the cash index, and Nikkei 225 futures in Chicago declined. The Australian dollar kept sliding, and the yen ticked higher. Former Goldman Sachs banker Roger Ng is in plea talks to avoid a U.S. trial on charges he broke anti-bribery laws and conspired to launder money embezzled from Malaysia’s state investment fund 1MDB. Prosecutors say bribes and kickbacks were paid in connection with Goldman’s bond offerings, which helped the fund raise more than $6 billion and generated $600 million in fees for the bank, in a scandal that shook the financial world. Malaysia is tracing the web of transactionslinked to 1MDB and former premier Najib Razak’s accounts. The Fed is amplifying its warnings about the perils of risky corporate debt, with a report showing the market for it grew 20% last year while lending standards kept slipping. Particularly striking is that the businesses with the biggest loads are also taking on the most risk, and default protections are eroding. The central bank has sounded the alarm about leveraged loans and weakening standards since last year, but defaults remain low. When we delved into big deals last year, we found a trillion-dollar powder keg. Luckin Coffee, the ambitious homegrown upstart challenging Starbucks’ dominance in China’s nascent coffee culture, is seeking to raise up to $510 million in a U.S. IPO. It’s planning to sell 30 million ADSs for $15 to $17 each, which would make it the sixth largest offering on U.S. exchanges so far this year, data compiled by Bloomberg show. The unicorn has been burning through cash to try to overtake the Seattle chain, and it’s confident it’s got a winning model in its small outlets. Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.