The five million voters who did not register or turn out saw both the ANC and DA’s hopes crumble. While the ANC has won Gauteng, the lean majority is a loud message from its supporters in a province which is home to the party’s popular President Cyril Ramaphosa and to a large section of its Cabinet members. The ANC campaign leader, Lebogang Maile, said the party had faced a tough crowd in Gauteng where voters had more choice. “We are not entitled to anything. We must be humbled that we can govern (without a coalition).” Maile said he was pleased the ANC had gained ground from 2016 when the party received 45% in the province in the local government elections. Using a chicken analogy, he said that voters in Gauteng had options that ranged from Chicken Licken to KFC and Nando’s with lots in between. The ANC lost support to the EFF, which won a stonking 14.68% of the vote. Moshe Koma, the EFF’s Gauteng provincial secretary, said that the province had returned the highest number of votes to the party’s national tally: 633,400 residents in Gauteng came out for its uncompromising positions on land, jobs and radical redistribution. Asked what positions the party would push, he said: “Of course it has to be land. Jobs for unemployed youth. The insourcing of security guards (and other outsourced workers). Sitting in the DA section, party provincial committee leader Khume Ramulifhe looked crestfallen. “I am disappointed. We have many registered voters who did not turn out and three million voters who did not register.” The DA not only did not make its target of being able to be the lead partner in forming a coalition government, but it also lost three seats.  Ramulifhe said the party had lost seats in “the peripherals” – peri-urban areas such as Midvaal, Merafong and Pretoria, where its Afrikaans supporters who owned smallholdings and farms moved support to the FF Plus with its message of “Slaan Terug” (Fight Back). “We failed to sustain support (from the 2016 local government election).” He said the party would have to reflect deeply on the election outcome, but like most DA leaders he did not think party leader Mmusi Maimane would walk the plank despite the party not making a single one of the big goals it had set itself for the 2019 national and provincial elections. He said Maimane’s position was safe until the party’s next congress in 2021. DM  Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.