So, you’ve voted. Or maybe you intend to go later, or not at all. What to do in the meantime? What do you do while waiting for the results to pour in? You could channel-hop election coverage but why not check out the rise of 2018 US midterm hopefuls, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Cori Bush, Paula Jean Swearengin Amy and Vilela, in the inspiring Netflix Documentary, Knock Down The House. What started off as a documentary, shot on a shoestring and tracking the campaign of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, then an unknown Democratic Party 2018 contender for New York’s 14thcongressional district, ended up capturing history in the making. Ocasio-Cortez went on to defeat 10-term Democratic Party incumbent Congressman Joe Crowley. It was a spectacular victory for a growing brand of grassroots, working people’s power and activism pitted against big money, vested interests and entrenched political habit. While Rachel Lears’ documentary Knock Down The House, now on Netflix, began with Ocasio-Cortez as its focus, it soon expanded to include St Louis contender, nurse, Cori Bush, West Virginia’s Jean Swearengin and Nevada’s Amy Vilela, who opted for politics when her daughter Shalynne died from a treatable aneurism “at the hands of our profit-driven healthcare system”. The documentary offers an insight into the tensions and concerns in an age of Trump and the failure of establishment politics. If you like your politics authentic, give it a watch. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.