Forensic Data Analysts director Keith Keating. (Photo: Marianne Thamm) A few days after a search and seizure warrant was issued on 1 December 2017, investigators raided the homes of Forensic Data Analysts (FDA) director Keith Keating and former acting National Commissioner of Police Khomotso Phahlane, both implicated in allegations of fraud, theft, corruption, racketeering and money laundering.  20 The raid took place about a week after dramatic revelations to a parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Accounts hearing of wide-scale alleged corruption and procurement irregularities in the South African Information and Technology Agency (SITA) and the SAPS, amounting to about R6.1-billion.  21 The Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID), the Hawks and SAPS raided at least seven homes, including Keating’s, and those of Phahlane and other family members implicated in receiving alleged kickbacks from Keating.  21 A Pretoria car dealership, belonging to Durand Snyman, that had allegedly been used to launder money from Keating to Phahlane was also searched. An IPID investigation had traced payments by Keating to Snyman through his bank in Namibia.  20 At the time of the raid, IPID said it had found unused SAPS electronic tags worth R374-million hidden at a construction site and had also located documents which proved that a case SAPS had been investigating against then IPID head Robert McBride had been fabricated.  21 Senior magistrate IP Du Preez had authorised the warrant under the Prevention of Organised Crime Act. In an affidavit, the Hawks’ Colonel Kobus Roelofse had justified the application for the warrant, saying it was required for searches related to an investigation into a R45-million police forensics contract that had been recommended and paid in one day, in favour of Keating’s FDA. A further R7-million, unaccounted for in the tender, was allegedly also paid to Keating’s company, rounding off the total to a cool R52-million.  21 Keating then turned to the South Gauteng High Court to challenge the authorisation on several technicalities. Keating was annoyed at the large number of files, bank statements and other material that had been seized.  20 The South Gauteng High Court dismissed the matter with costs, which was when Keating, FDA, Snyman and Christo de Bruin, a friend of Snyman’s, lodged the appeal in January 2019.  20 Respondents to Keating’s application included senior magistrate Du Preez (who authorised the warrant), the Minister of Police, the Hawks’ Colonel Roelofse, Colonel J du Plooy and the executive director of IPID. Keating’s appeal was dismissed with costs by Judges Eric Leach and Rammaka Mathopo on Tuesday, on the grounds that “there is no reasonable prospect of success in an appeal and there is no other compelling reason why an appeal should be heard”.  20 Keating is at the centre of a massive investigation by IPID and the Hawks into the capture of SITA and SAPS over a number of years. At least 20 top SAPS brass have been implicated in the alleged corruption. DM  22 Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.