The Justice, Crime Prevention and Security (JCPS) Cluster gave its final update on the state of readiness for the country’s sixth general elections, which will take place on May 8. Cele told the media that, through intelligence driven operations, hot spots in the country had been identified and would be prioritised. “As part of the deployment strategy, a capacity of five teams will be maintained at national level to be deployed to any part of the country where the situation requires urgent intervention to deal with high risk situations,” Cele said. “The highest risk areas are the North West and KwaZulu-Natal provinces.” Cele added that almost all of the provinces would have some sort of risk, but that other provinces had been identified as having a low to medium risk of possible disruptions on election day. “In North West and KZN, there are elements of activities which could undermine the election processes to run smoothly.” The minister said that police would not interfere with peaceful protests on the day, but would intervene if they turned violent or interfered with the constitutional rights of people wanting to vote. Gauteng & Limpopo Despite the recent shutdown protests in parts of Gauteng, including Tshwane and Alexandra, State Security Minister Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba told the media that the province had not been identified as being a high risk area. “Gauteng has enough capacity. The two provinces we mentioned (KwaZulu-Natal and North West), we specifically identified them because they need reinforcement to deal with these hot spots,” Letsatsi-Duba said. “Gauteng, we strongly feel they have enough capacity to deal with whatever protests or threats that [may] make elections impossible in Gauteng.” Letsatsi-Duba added that Vuwani in Limpopo was also deemed a priority area, as it had been ahead of the 2014 municipal elections, but that a deployment plan had been put in place to ensure people there would be able to cast their votes without fear of intimidation or violence. The Numbers Cele announced that 51 306 police officers would be deployed to the 22 924 voting stations on election day. Low-risk voting stations would have two police officers, those deemed medium risk would be manned by four police officers, while high risk stations would have six officers present. Cele said additional police resources would also be deployed where needed. “As a force multiplier, we will be deploying around 3 504 reservists nationwide,” he added. In addition to the police force being deployed, the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) is also on standby. “Under the ambit of the National JOINTS, the SANDF will be on stand-by to provide support to the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC). In the case of a disaster, the SANDF is on standby and ready to support, as they have contributed to assisting in the recent floods in KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape,” Cele said. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.