As an anti-corruption campaigner and an instititutionalist, can Cyril Ramaphosa appoint Gordhan in the face of the Public Protector’s report? In weekend meetings, the President mulled this conundrum with his inner circle which includes Gordhan. By filing his application to review Mkhwebane’s report in the High Court on Tuesday, Gordhan has ensured the finding is now, legally, in abeyance and there is no legal reason for him not to be appointed. But there are still other political hurdles for Ramaphosa and Gordhan to clear. The ANC deputy president David Mabuza has set up a new practice when he refused to be sworn in as an MP with an Integrity Commission report hanging over his head. Once he resolved that, he was sworn in on Tuesday. Political observers from the opposite side of the ANC now want Gordhan to do the same thing. In addition, if Ramaphosa does not appoint politicians like ANC Women’s League president Bathabile Dlamini and former Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba into his Cabinet while placing Gordhan in office, he could very easily face a backlash for exercising double standards. Until now, Ramaphosa had no intention of including politicians like Dlamini and Gigaba in his Cabinet because they are at the centre of allegations of state capture. But Mkhwebane’s report can now be read as placing Gordhan in the same camp even though the facts paint a different story. If Ramaphosa is to stay true to his identity as a President who believes in institutions like that of the Public Protector, he cannot be seen to be thumbing his nose at her finding, no matter how odious. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.