Veteran journalist Benjamin Pogrund January 19, 2015 (Photo by Gallo Images / The Times / Sizwe Ndingane) / Veteran journalist Mathatha Tsedu, 28 February 2011. (Photo by Gallo Images/Sowetan/Veli Nhlapo)    Less Kenneth Mokgatlhe is a political and media practitioner and former PAC Secretary for Information and Publicity. The oldest democracies, including the US, talk about the media being the Fourth Estate of government. This has been tested under the administration of President Donald Trump, who dismisses this entity as “fake news”, and went on to bar one of CNN’s journalists from his White House briefings. Meanwhile, in South Africa, Jessie Duarte of the ruling ANC attacked eNCA journalist Samkelo Maseko for simply doing his work. Julius Malema of the EFF has, in many instances, publicly attacked journalists from the time he was the leader of the ANC Youth League, up until today. Journalists have been part of the revolution and the struggle of the people, and more often than not are on the side of the masses, which means that they are at odds with those who abuse power, as they have had to take on the role of the watchdog of society. Journalists are killed in the line of duty, others are assassinated for the servant work they do, and even more disturbing, journalists are persecuted and targeted by authoritarian governments which have no regard for press freedom. The apartheid regime in South Africa had no tolerance for press freedom, to the extent that it would shut down a media outlet if it did not agree with it. Journalists were arrested and placed with other political prisoners. President Cyril Ramaphosa, on 25 April 2019, bestowed National Orders on brave men and women within and outside the country — individuals who have contributed towards its development, as well as aiding it, so that it could realise the democracy we enjoy today. The late Edna Molewa is one of those who were honoured, may her soul rest in peace. At this year’s National Orders, two of our most senior journalists were honoured: Benjamin Pogrund and Mathatha Tsedu, who are both the personification of true journalism, not only celebrated in their own countries, but around the world. Pogrund and Tsedu received Silver for the Order of Ikhamanga. Pogrund, who defied the apartheid regime when he was still with the liberal-left Rand Daily Mail, terrorised the racist regime until the publication was shut down by its owners. He unashamedly continued to write for many papers where he contributed towards the emancipation of this country. “Uncle Benjie” became central to the liberation discourse due to his personal friendship with Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe, about whom he later wrote a detailed biography. “Uncle Benjie” became the link between Sobukwe and his family, as well as his party, the Pan Africanist Congress. Pogrund was subjected to police persecution, but he clearly understood that this was because he wanted to help free the oppressed. Mathatha Tsedu is what we can today call “black excellence” — he symbolises the pride of a black man. He is the recipient of many awards from South Africa, as well as from many other countries. Tsedu was also targeted by the apartheid security apparatus. He was detained without trial and barred from practising journalism for more than six years: He fought for the liberation of this country. Both Tsedu and Pogrund are at the stage of life when many would be happily retired and spending their days with their beloved families. However, these two outstanding men are still contributing towards their countries’ development. Tsedu served as a member of the SABC Board until he resigned at the end of 2018. Pogrund is running Israel’s Yakar Centre For Social Concern where he is trying to bring together the Jewish people, Christians and Muslims, under one roof. He is also still putting pen to paper, writing books about apartheid. Balanced and factual journalism is not dead, and should not be silenced to suit one’s narrative — and against all odds, both Tsedu and Pogrund are proof of this. DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.