According to a statement from Transnet, issued late on Wednesday evening, Morwe’s contract comes to an end on May 3, 2019. Transnet did not say why Morwe’s contract was not renewed or extended. Subscribe to Fin24’s newsletter here “The board acknowledges the good work done by Mr. Morwe in pursuit of the reorganisation and operational efficiencies at Transnet and wishes to express its appreciation. “To this extent the Board commits to continuing with the programme and plans started by Mr. Morwe,” board chairperson Popo Molefe said in the statement. Transnet has appointed Mohammed Mahomedy as acting group chief executive. For the past 12 months, Mahomedy served as the acting chief financial officer.  1 “The stability of the organisation remains a key focus of the board and this appointment was made with this in mind, giving consideration to Mahomedy’s experience at Transnet over a period of more than 12 years,” Molefe said. He also assured that Transnet is working to fill critical vacancies at the organisation such as that of group chief executive, and chief financial officer. “Transnet urges its management and employees to build organisational cohesion and common focus on the central mandate of the company, which is to move goods and lower the cost of doing business in South Africa.” READ: Transnet executive resigns following suspension Transnet recently announced the resignation of an executive, Ravi Nair, following his suspension in March. Nair was one of four executives suspended, as their presence in the workplace had the potential to jeopardise investigations into their alleged misconduct, Transnet said at the time.  1 DM Watch Pauli van Wyk’s Cat Play The Piano Here! No, not really. But now that we have your attention, we wanted to tell you a little bit about what happened at SARS. Tom Moyane and his cronies bequeathed South Africa with a R48-billion tax shortfall, as of February 2018. It's the only thing that grew under Moyane's tenure... the year before, the hole had been R30.7-billion. And to fund those shortfalls, you know who has to cough up? You - the South African taxpayer. It was the sterling work of a team of investigative journalists, Scorpio’s Pauli van Wyk and Marianne Thamm along with our great friends at amaBhungane, that caused the SARS capturers to be finally flushed out of the system. Moyane, Makwakwa… the lot of them... gone. But our job is not yet done. We need more readers to become Maverick Insiders, the friends who will help ensure that many more investigations will come. Contributions go directly towards growing our editorial team and ensuring that Daily Maverick and Scorpio have a sustainable future. We can’t rely on advertising and don't want to restrict access to only those who can afford a paywall subscription. Membership is about more than just contributing financially – it is about how we Defend Truth, together. So, if you feel so inclined, and would like a way to support the cause, please join our community of Maverick Insiders.... you could view it as the opposite of a sin tax. And if you are already Maverick Insider, tell your mother, call a friend, whisper to your loved one, shout at your boss, write to a stranger, announce it on your social network. The battle for the future of South Africa is on, and you can be part of it. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.