Around 200 guests, including former president Jacob Zuma, were present for Zikalala’s inauguration as premier on Monday in Pietermaritzburg, following the May 8 general elections.  2 The ANC retained the province, albeit with a significantly reduced majority – an almost 11% decline. The 10 MECs to serve under Zikalala will be: 1. Agriculture and Rural Development: MEC Bongi Sithole-Moloi; 2. Arts and Culture, Sports and Recreation: MEC Hlengiwe Mavimbela;  1 3. Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs: MEC Sipho Hlomuka; 4. Transport, Community Safety and Liaison: MEC Mxolisi Kaunda; 5. Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs: MEC Nomusa Dube-Mncube; 6. Education: MEC Kwazi Mshengu; 7. Health: MEC Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu;  2 8. Social Development: MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza; 9. Provincial Treasury: MEC Ravi Pillay; 10. Public Works: Peggy Nkonyeni.  1 Zuma makes appearance A smiling Zuma was among the 200 guests who were invited to a smaller than usual swearing-in ceremony at the premier’s residence in Pietermaritzburg. Some of the other high level guests such as Zuma were former transport minister Sbu Ndebele and Police Minister Bheki Cele. Zuma was a no-show at President Cyril Ramaphosa’s inauguration over the weekend. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.