File photo: Reserve Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago ahead of Finance Minister Tito Mboweni’s 2019 budget speech in Parliament on February 20, 2019. Photo: Gallo Images / Brenton Geach South Africa’s main consumer inflation number (CPI) slowed in April to 4.4% from 4.5% in March, Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) said on Wednesday, the day before the South African Reserve Bank unveils its decision on interest rates at the conclusion of its three-day Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting. This is the 25th straight month that the rate has been inside the upper limit of the Reserve Bank’s 3%-6% target range. So, as the market widely expects, the main lending rate is likely to remain unchanged at 6.75%. The data does contain some promising trends. Food inflation remained at 2.3% for the fourth month running, easing the burden on lower-income households which spend a large portion of their income on calories. This may temper wage demands in upcoming pay negotiations in sectors such as platinum mining. And relatively moderate inflation stays the hand of the Reserve Bank from tightening, which would raise borrowing costs for already hard-pressed consumers. The trouble is that these hard-pressed consumers are not spending, which highlights the underlying fragilities of the economy. Retail indicators have been sluggish and so has data from the key mining and manufacturing sectors, pointing to a possible economic contraction in the first quarter. Yet at the same time, price pressures are building.  “The fuel price index saw a rise of 7.6% in April from March, on the back of a hefty price hike. The 7.6% rise is the biggest monthly jump in fuel prices since April 2015 when the fuel index climbed by 14.3%,” Stats SA said in its release on its website. Amid escalating US and Iran tensions and supply cuts by producer group Opec, oil prices may still have lots of upside. Central banks, even when their core mandates are price and currency stability, often have balancing acts, as their policies also need to be cognisant of economic growth. And with South Africa’s economy growing at a snail’s pace at best, and a number of factors threatening global growth such as US-China trade rows, there may be room to at least raise the potential for monetary loosening at some soonish point. “A negative Q1 GDP growth outcome (and notable downward revision to Reserve Bank growth forecasts), moderate inflation outcomes and now also a global environment turning more dovish amid the escalation in trade concerns (and the subsequent negative impact on global growth), provides a cocktail of factors suggesting that the MPC should at least debate the option of an interest rate cut at this week’s MPC meeting,” NKC African Economics senior economist Elize Kruger said in a research note. The devil will be in the details of the Reserve Bank’s MPC statement on Thursday afternoon. Even if it holds rates as expected, its tone may suggest whether there is a rising prospect of a rate cut. DM Want to watch Richard Poplak’s audition for SA’s Got Talent? Who doesn’t? Alas, it was removed by the host site for prolific swearing*... Now that we’ve got your attention, we thought we’d take the opportunity to talk to you about the small matter of book burning and freedom of speech. Since its release, Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book Gangster State, has sparked numerous fascist-like behavior from certain members of the public (and the State). There have been planned book burnings, disrupted launches and Ace Magashule has openly called him a liar. And just to say thanks, a R10m defamation suit has been lodged against the author. Pieter-Louis Myburgh is our latest Scorpio Investigative journalist recruit and we’re not going to let him and his crucial book be silenced. When the Cape Town launch was postponed, Maverick Insider stepped in and relocated it to a secure location so that Pieter-Louis’ revelations could be heard by the public. If we’ve learnt one thing over the past ten years it is this: when anyone tries to infringe on our constitutional rights, we have to fight back. Every day, our journalists are uncovering more details and evidence of State Capture and its various reincarnations. The rot is deep and the threats, like this recent one to freedom of speech, are real. You can support the cause by becoming an Insider and help free the speech that can make a difference. *No video of Richard Poplak auditioning for SA’s Got Talent actually exists. Unless it does and we don’t know about it please send it through. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.