Eighty-nine significant findings are listed in connection with the disaster, according to an extract from the final crash report distributed to stakeholders and seen by Bloomberg News. One major point of focus is a flight-control feature called the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, which has also been implicated in an Ethiopian Airlines crash in March. Lion Air Flight Crashes Into Sea Off Jakarta
The landing gear of Lion Air JT 610, Nov. 3. Photographer: Ulet Ifansasti/Getty Images
A spokesman for Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee declined to comment or verify the authenticity of the report, which is scheduled to be publicly released later Friday. Boeing declined to comment ahead of the report’s official release. Minutes after taking off on the morning of Oct. 29, Lion Air Flight 610 nosedived into the Java Sea, killing all 189 people on board. Boeing Jet Goes Down With 189 People in First 737 Max Crash
When Will Boeing 737 Max Fly Again and More Questions: QuickTake
Pilot’s Mother Calls for Training as Boeing Blamed in Crash
The 737 Max has been grounded worldwide since shortly after the subsequent crash in Ethiopia, costing Boeing $9.2 billion and weighing on the company’s outlook. Indonesia’s findings come as regulators worldwide assess the fate of what was the Chicago-based company’s best-selling plane. Boeing says it is has made “significant progress” in returning the 737 Max to service. Boeing Reprograms 737 System Linked to Crashes
The NTSC presented a slideshow of some of its findings to families of the Lion Air crash victims in Jakarta on Wednesday. It said the MCAS was too reliant on a single angle-of-attack sensor, making it vulnerable if the sensor malfunctioned. The investigation found that a replacement sensor installed on the doomed Lion Air plane wasn’t calibrated properly during the repair. Improper Takeoff Was Missed Opportunity to Avert Lion Air Crash Missed Opportunity
Problems with the three-month old jet emerged on previous flights, including one the day before the crash. There, pilots choose to ignore a malfunctioning airspeed indicator and take off for their destination, according to two people familiar with the incident. One of them said the flight-data recorder on at least four flights in the lead up to the crash showed invalid airspeed readings. (Updates with Boeing declining to comment in third paragraph.)
–With assistance from Kyunghee Park. To contact the reporter on this story:
Harry Suhartono in Jakarta at hsuhartono@bloomberg.net To contact the editors responsible for this story:
Young-Sam Cho at ycho2@bloomberg.net Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.