 In this context, it’s important to interrogate the way in which we conceive tech infrastructure. It is a misconception that IT costs end at the point of purchase. The initial purchase is merely a fraction of the total cost businesses should be considering. In fact, research shows that a PC’s base price typically represents less than 50% of its total cost of ownership (TCO), with deployment, support, maintenance, management and other costs accounting for the balance. Without assessing the TCO, it can be difficult to understand the real costs of IT equipment, in the long run. So let’s look at TCO, with a view to re-thinking which elements of enterprise IT expenditure do and should warrant the highest levels of scrutiny. Defining TCO If we define TCO as the total cost of using and maintaining an IT investment over time, comprehensive TCO calculations should include a combination of direct costs (hardware, software, operations, support and administration) and indirect costs (end-user operations and downtime). IT spending, then, becomes a balancing act between hardware, software and services – with ecosystem management playing a large role in cost reduction. Other considerations should encompass deployment, support, maintenance, management, and a host of ‘soft’ upsides relating to productivity, performance, and talent acquisition. Mac@IBM Consider the experience of IBM, where the user choice program, Mac@IBM, has enabled the deployment of 134,000 Macs, 90,000 iPhones and 40,000 iPads. Fletcher Previn, IBM’s CIO, says that for every Mac device IBM purchases for its workforce, the company saves $273 to $543 (depending on the model), versus the TCO of comparable PCs during a four-year lifespan.  Yes, the upfront cost per Mac may be higher than a PC, but the former’s residual value is also higher, in addition to:  Other case studies While uniquely South African evidence relating to Mac vs PC TCO is in its relative infancy, this is not the case in the United States, where multiple studies demonstrate that a Mac’s TCO is 15 to 30% less (depending on user group) than PC systems. Furthermore, there’s an average saving in support spend per user of up to $205 over three years, with up to 80% fewer Mac support tickets. The right questions To get to ‘real costs’, it is important to ask the right questions about upfront costs, how platforms are supported, and what needs to be done to increase operating efficiency within your specific environment. In short, if we simplify the situation to a choice between Mac and PC: Now, we don’t expect you to ask and answer these questions yourself. iStore Business provides a professional in-depth TCO analysis for you because we believe that, in most cases, companies will find significant savings over the full lifecycle by switching to an Apple enterprise program. Stop and think about the cost experience in your own environment. Should you want to uncover some real numbers, contact iStore Business today.  BM  About iStore Business iStore Business is not just another partner, and the power of Apple does not begin and end with the product. At present, we’re successfully servicing 500+ enterprise clients and over 15,000 SMEs with an interconnected ecosystem­ – a blended desktop and mobile experience – that’s ideal for business IT. And we believe that Apple proves to be more affordable than existing hardware choices. Contact us today to request a TCO analysis for your business’s IT.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.